Ñêà÷àíî ñ ñàéòà www.HomeEnglish.ru

The Jungle Book

Rudyard Kipling




Contents

     Mowgli's Brothers
     Hunting-Song of the Seeonee Pack
     Kaa's Hunting
     Road-Song of the Bandar-Log
     "Tiger! Tiger!"
     Mowgli's Song
     The White Seal
     Lukannon
     "Rikki-Tikki-Tavi"
     Darzee's Chant
     Toomai of the Elephants
     Shiv and the Grasshopper
     Her Majesty's Servants
     Parade Song of the Camp Animals




Mowgli's Brothers

     Now Rann the Kite brings home the night
        That Mang the Bat sets free--
     The herds are shut in byre and hut
        For loosed till dawn are we.
     This is the hour of pride and power,
        Talon and tush and claw.
     Oh, hear the call!--Good hunting all
        That keep the Jungle Law!
     Night-Song in the Jungle

It was seven o'clock of a very warm evening in the Seeonee hills when
Father Wolf woke up from his day's rest, scratched himself, yawned, and
spread out his paws one after the other to get rid of the sleepy feeling
in their tips. Mother Wolf lay with her big gray nose dropped across her
four tumbling, squealing cubs, and the moon shone into the mouth of the
cave where they all lived. "Augrh!" said Father Wolf. "It is time to
hunt again." He was going to spring down hill when a little shadow with
a bushy tail crossed the threshold and whined: "Good luck go with you, O
Chief of the Wolves. And good luck and strong white teeth go with noble
children that they may never forget the hungry in this world."

It was the jackal--Tabaqui, the Dish-licker--and the wolves of India
despise Tabaqui because he runs about making mischief, and telling
tales, and eating rags and pieces of leather from the village
rubbish-heaps. But they are afraid of him too, because Tabaqui, more
than anyone else in the jungle, is apt to go mad, and then he forgets
that he was ever afraid of anyone, and runs through the forest biting
everything in his way. Even the tiger runs and hides when little Tabaqui
goes mad, for madness is the most disgraceful thing that can overtake
a wild creature. We call it hydrophobia, but they call it dewanee--the
madness--and run.

"Enter, then, and look," said Father Wolf stiffly, "but there is no food
here."

"For a wolf, no," said Tabaqui, "but for so mean a person as myself a
dry bone is a good feast. Who are we, the Gidur-log [the jackal people],
to pick and choose?" He scuttled to the back of the cave, where he
found the bone of a buck with some meat on it, and sat cracking the end
merrily.

"All thanks for this good meal," he said, licking his lips. "How
beautiful are the noble children! How large are their eyes! And so young
too! Indeed, indeed, I might have remembered that the children of kings
are men from the beginning."

Now, Tabaqui knew as well as anyone else that there is nothing so
unlucky as to compliment children to their faces. It pleased him to see
Mother and Father Wolf look uncomfortable.

Tabaqui sat still, rejoicing in the mischief that he had made, and then
he said spitefully:

"Shere Khan, the Big One, has shifted his hunting grounds. He will hunt
among these hills for the next moon, so he has told me."

Shere Khan was the tiger who lived near the Waingunga River, twenty
miles away.

"He has no right!" Father Wolf began angrily--"By the Law of the Jungle
he has no right to change his quarters without due warning. He will
frighten every head of game within ten miles, and I--I have to kill for
two, these days."

"His mother did not call him Lungri [the Lame One] for nothing," said
Mother Wolf quietly. "He has been lame in one foot from his birth. That
is why he has only killed cattle. Now the villagers of the Waingunga are
angry with him, and he has come here to make our villagers angry.
They will scour the jungle for him when he is far away, and we and our
children must run when the grass is set alight. Indeed, we are very
grateful to Shere Khan!"

"Shall I tell him of your gratitude?" said Tabaqui.

"Out!" snapped Father Wolf. "Out and hunt with thy master. Thou hast
done harm enough for one night."

"I go," said Tabaqui quietly. "Ye can hear Shere Khan below in the
thickets. I might have saved myself the message."

Father Wolf listened, and below in the valley that ran down to a little
river he heard the dry, angry, snarly, singsong whine of a tiger who has
caught nothing and does not care if all the jungle knows it.

"The fool!" said Father Wolf. "To begin a night's work with that noise!
Does he think that our buck are like his fat Waingunga bullocks?"

"H'sh. It is neither bullock nor buck he hunts to-night," said Mother
Wolf. "It is Man."

The whine had changed to a sort of humming purr that seemed to come
from every quarter of the compass. It was the noise that bewilders
woodcutters and gypsies sleeping in the open, and makes them run
sometimes into the very mouth of the tiger.

"Man!" said Father Wolf, showing all his white teeth. "Faugh! Are there
not enough beetles and frogs in the tanks that he must eat Man, and on
our ground too!"

The Law of the Jungle, which never orders anything without a reason,
forbids every beast to eat Man except when he is killing to show his
children how to kill, and then he must hunt outside the hunting grounds
of his pack or tribe. The real reason for this is that man-killing
means, sooner or later, the arrival of white men on elephants, with
guns, and hundreds of brown men with gongs and rockets and torches.
Then everybody in the jungle suffers. The reason the beasts give among
themselves is that Man is the weakest and most defenseless of all living
things, and it is unsportsmanlike to touch him. They say too--and it is
true--that man-eaters become mangy, and lose their teeth.

The purr grew louder, and ended in the full-throated "Aaarh!" of the
tiger's charge.

Then there was a howl--an untigerish howl--from Shere Khan. "He has
missed," said Mother Wolf. "What is it?"

Father Wolf ran out a few paces and heard Shere Khan muttering and
mumbling savagely as he tumbled about in the scrub.

"The fool has had no more sense than to jump at a woodcutter's campfire,
and has burned his feet," said Father Wolf with a grunt. "Tabaqui is
with him."

"Something is coming uphill," said Mother Wolf, twitching one ear. "Get
ready."

The bushes rustled a little in the thicket, and Father Wolf dropped
with his haunches under him, ready for his leap. Then, if you had been
watching, you would have seen the most wonderful thing in the world--the
wolf checked in mid-spring. He made his bound before he saw what it was
he was jumping at, and then he tried to stop himself. The result was
that he shot up straight into the air for four or five feet, landing
almost where he left ground.

"Man!" he snapped. "A man's cub. Look!"

Directly in front of him, holding on by a low branch, stood a naked
brown baby who could just walk--as soft and as dimpled a little atom
as ever came to a wolf's cave at night. He looked up into Father Wolf's
face, and laughed.

"Is that a man's cub?" said Mother Wolf. "I have never seen one. Bring
it here."

A Wolf accustomed to moving his own cubs can, if necessary, mouth an egg
without breaking it, and though Father Wolf's jaws closed right on the
child's back not a tooth even scratched the skin as he laid it down
among the cubs.

"How little! How naked, and--how bold!" said Mother Wolf softly. The
baby was pushing his way between the cubs to get close to the warm hide.
"Ahai! He is taking his meal with the others. And so this is a man's
cub. Now, was there ever a wolf that could boast of a man's cub among
her children?"

"I have heard now and again of such a thing, but never in our Pack or in
my time," said Father Wolf. "He is altogether without hair, and I
could kill him with a touch of my foot. But see, he looks up and is not
afraid."

The moonlight was blocked out of the mouth of the cave, for Shere Khan's
great square head and shoulders were thrust into the entrance. Tabaqui,
behind him, was squeaking: "My lord, my lord, it went in here!"

"Shere Khan does us great honor," said Father Wolf, but his eyes were
very angry. "What does Shere Khan need?"

"My quarry. A man's cub went this way," said Shere Khan. "Its parents
have run off. Give it to me."

Shere Khan had jumped at a woodcutter's campfire, as Father Wolf had
said, and was furious from the pain of his burned feet. But Father Wolf
knew that the mouth of the cave was too narrow for a tiger to come in
by. Even where he was, Shere Khan's shoulders and forepaws were cramped
for want of room, as a man's would be if he tried to fight in a barrel.

"The Wolves are a free people," said Father Wolf. "They take orders from
the Head of the Pack, and not from any striped cattle-killer. The man's
cub is ours--to kill if we choose."

"Ye choose and ye do not choose! What talk is this of choosing? By the
bull that I killed, am I to stand nosing into your dog's den for my fair
dues? It is I, Shere Khan, who speak!"

The tiger's roar filled the cave with thunder. Mother Wolf shook herself
clear of the cubs and sprang forward, her eyes, like two green moons in
the darkness, facing the blazing eyes of Shere Khan.

"And it is I, Raksha [The Demon], who answers. The man's cub is mine,
Lungri--mine to me! He shall not be killed. He shall live to run with
the Pack and to hunt with the Pack; and in the end, look you, hunter of
little naked cubs--frog-eater--fish-killer--he shall hunt thee! Now get
hence, or by the Sambhur that I killed (I eat no starved cattle), back
thou goest to thy mother, burned beast of the jungle, lamer than ever
thou camest into the world! Go!"

Father Wolf looked on amazed. He had almost forgotten the days when he
won Mother Wolf in fair fight from five other wolves, when she ran in
the Pack and was not called The Demon for compliment's sake. Shere Khan
might have faced Father Wolf, but he could not stand up against Mother
Wolf, for he knew that where he was she had all the advantage of the
ground, and would fight to the death. So he backed out of the cave mouth
growling, and when he was clear he shouted:

"Each dog barks in his own yard! We will see what the Pack will say to
this fostering of man-cubs. The cub is mine, and to my teeth he will
come in the end, O bush-tailed thieves!"

Mother Wolf threw herself down panting among the cubs, and Father Wolf
said to her gravely:

"Shere Khan speaks this much truth. The cub must be shown to the Pack.
Wilt thou still keep him, Mother?"

"Keep him!" she gasped. "He came naked, by night, alone and very hungry;
yet he was not afraid! Look, he has pushed one of my babes to one side
already. And that lame butcher would have killed him and would have run
off to the Waingunga while the villagers here hunted through all our
lairs in revenge! Keep him? Assuredly I will keep him. Lie still, little
frog. O thou Mowgli--for Mowgli the Frog I will call thee--the time will
come when thou wilt hunt Shere Khan as he has hunted thee."

"But what will our Pack say?" said Father Wolf.

The Law of the Jungle lays down very clearly that any wolf may, when he
marries, withdraw from the Pack he belongs to. But as soon as his cubs
are old enough to stand on their feet he must bring them to the Pack
Council, which is generally held once a month at full moon, in order
that the other wolves may identify them. After that inspection the cubs
are free to run where they please, and until they have killed their
first buck no excuse is accepted if a grown wolf of the Pack kills one
of them. The punishment is death where the murderer can be found; and if
you think for a minute you will see that this must be so.

Father Wolf waited till his cubs could run a little, and then on the
night of the Pack Meeting took them and Mowgli and Mother Wolf to the
Council Rock--a hilltop covered with stones and boulders where a hundred
wolves could hide. Akela, the great gray Lone Wolf, who led all the Pack
by strength and cunning, lay out at full length on his rock, and
below him sat forty or more wolves of every size and color, from
badger-colored veterans who could handle a buck alone to young black
three-year-olds who thought they could. The Lone Wolf had led them for a
year now. He had fallen twice into a wolf trap in his youth, and once he
had been beaten and left for dead; so he knew the manners and customs
of men. There was very little talking at the Rock. The cubs tumbled over
each other in the center of the circle where their mothers and fathers
sat, and now and again a senior wolf would go quietly up to a cub, look
at him carefully, and return to his place on noiseless feet. Sometimes a
mother would push her cub far out into the moonlight to be sure that
he had not been overlooked. Akela from his rock would cry: "Ye know
the Law--ye know the Law. Look well, O Wolves!" And the anxious mothers
would take up the call: "Look--look well, O Wolves!"

At last--and Mother Wolf's neck bristles lifted as the time came--Father
Wolf pushed "Mowgli the Frog," as they called him, into the center,
where he sat laughing and playing with some pebbles that glistened in
the moonlight.

Akela never raised his head from his paws, but went on with the
monotonous cry: "Look well!" A muffled roar came up from behind the
rocks--the voice of Shere Khan crying: "The cub is mine. Give him to
me. What have the Free People to do with a man's cub?" Akela never even
twitched his ears. All he said was: "Look well, O Wolves! What have
the Free People to do with the orders of any save the Free People? Look
well!"

There was a chorus of deep growls, and a young wolf in his fourth year
flung back Shere Khan's question to Akela: "What have the Free People to
do with a man's cub?" Now, the Law of the Jungle lays down that if there
is any dispute as to the right of a cub to be accepted by the Pack, he
must be spoken for by at least two members of the Pack who are not his
father and mother.

"Who speaks for this cub?" said Akela. "Among the Free People who
speaks?" There was no answer and Mother Wolf got ready for what she knew
would be her last fight, if things came to fighting.

Then the only other creature who is allowed at the Pack Council--Baloo,
the sleepy brown bear who teaches the wolf cubs the Law of the Jungle:
old Baloo, who can come and go where he pleases because he eats only
nuts and roots and honey--rose upon his hind quarters and grunted.

"The man's cub--the man's cub?" he said. "I speak for the man's cub.
There is no harm in a man's cub. I have no gift of words, but I speak
the truth. Let him run with the Pack, and be entered with the others. I
myself will teach him."

"We need yet another," said Akela. "Baloo has spoken, and he is our
teacher for the young cubs. Who speaks besides Baloo?"

A black shadow dropped down into the circle. It was Bagheera the Black
Panther, inky black all over, but with the panther markings showing
up in certain lights like the pattern of watered silk. Everybody knew
Bagheera, and nobody cared to cross his path; for he was as cunning as
Tabaqui, as bold as the wild buffalo, and as reckless as the wounded
elephant. But he had a voice as soft as wild honey dripping from a tree,
and a skin softer than down.

"O Akela, and ye the Free People," he purred, "I have no right in your
assembly, but the Law of the Jungle says that if there is a doubt which
is not a killing matter in regard to a new cub, the life of that cub may
be bought at a price. And the Law does not say who may or may not pay
that price. Am I right?"

"Good! Good!" said the young wolves, who are always hungry. "Listen to
Bagheera. The cub can be bought for a price. It is the Law."

"Knowing that I have no right to speak here, I ask your leave."

"Speak then," cried twenty voices.

"To kill a naked cub is shame. Besides, he may make better sport for you
when he is grown. Baloo has spoken in his behalf. Now to Baloo's word
I will add one bull, and a fat one, newly killed, not half a mile
from here, if ye will accept the man's cub according to the Law. Is it
difficult?"

There was a clamor of scores of voices, saying: "What matter? He will
die in the winter rains. He will scorch in the sun. What harm can
a naked frog do us? Let him run with the Pack. Where is the bull,
Bagheera? Let him be accepted." And then came Akela's deep bay, crying:
"Look well--look well, O Wolves!"

Mowgli was still deeply interested in the pebbles, and he did not notice
when the wolves came and looked at him one by one. At last they all went
down the hill for the dead bull, and only Akela, Bagheera, Baloo, and
Mowgli's own wolves were left. Shere Khan roared still in the night, for
he was very angry that Mowgli had not been handed over to him.

"Ay, roar well," said Bagheera, under his whiskers, "for the time will
come when this naked thing will make thee roar to another tune, or I
know nothing of man."

"It was well done," said Akela. "Men and their cubs are very wise. He
may be a help in time."

"Truly, a help in time of need; for none can hope to lead the Pack
forever," said Bagheera.

Akela said nothing. He was thinking of the time that comes to every
leader of every pack when his strength goes from him and he gets feebler
and feebler, till at last he is killed by the wolves and a new leader
comes up--to be killed in his turn.

"Take him away," he said to Father Wolf, "and train him as befits one of
the Free People."

And that is how Mowgli was entered into the Seeonee Wolf Pack for the
price of a bull and on Baloo's good word.

Now you must be content to skip ten or eleven whole years, and only
guess at all the wonderful life that Mowgli led among the wolves,
because if it were written out it would fill ever so many books. He
grew up with the cubs, though they, of course, were grown wolves almost
before he was a child. And Father Wolf taught him his business, and the
meaning of things in the jungle, till every rustle in the grass, every
breath of the warm night air, every note of the owls above his head,
every scratch of a bat's claws as it roosted for a while in a tree, and
every splash of every little fish jumping in a pool meant just as much
to him as the work of his office means to a business man. When he was
not learning he sat out in the sun and slept, and ate and went to sleep
again. When he felt dirty or hot he swam in the forest pools; and
when he wanted honey (Baloo told him that honey and nuts were just as
pleasant to eat as raw meat) he climbed up for it, and that Bagheera
showed him how to do. Bagheera would lie out on a branch and call, "Come
along, Little Brother," and at first Mowgli would cling like the sloth,
but afterward he would fling himself through the branches almost as
boldly as the gray ape. He took his place at the Council Rock, too,
when the Pack met, and there he discovered that if he stared hard at any
wolf, the wolf would be forced to drop his eyes, and so he used to stare
for fun. At other times he would pick the long thorns out of the pads
of his friends, for wolves suffer terribly from thorns and burs in their
coats. He would go down the hillside into the cultivated lands by night,
and look very curiously at the villagers in their huts, but he had a
mistrust of men because Bagheera showed him a square box with a drop
gate so cunningly hidden in the jungle that he nearly walked into it,
and told him that it was a trap. He loved better than anything else to
go with Bagheera into the dark warm heart of the forest, to sleep all
through the drowsy day, and at night see how Bagheera did his
killing. Bagheera killed right and left as he felt hungry, and so did
Mowgli--with one exception. As soon as he was old enough to understand
things, Bagheera told him that he must never touch cattle because he had
been bought into the Pack at the price of a bull's life. "All the jungle
is thine," said Bagheera, "and thou canst kill everything that thou art
strong enough to kill; but for the sake of the bull that bought thee
thou must never kill or eat any cattle young or old. That is the Law of
the Jungle." Mowgli obeyed faithfully.

And he grew and grew strong as a boy must grow who does not know that
he is learning any lessons, and who has nothing in the world to think of
except things to eat.

Mother Wolf told him once or twice that Shere Khan was not a creature
to be trusted, and that some day he must kill Shere Khan. But though a
young wolf would have remembered that advice every hour, Mowgli forgot
it because he was only a boy--though he would have called himself a wolf
if he had been able to speak in any human tongue.

Shere Khan was always crossing his path in the jungle, for as Akela grew
older and feebler the lame tiger had come to be great friends with the
younger wolves of the Pack, who followed him for scraps, a thing Akela
would never have allowed if he had dared to push his authority to the
proper bounds. Then Shere Khan would flatter them and wonder that such
fine young hunters were content to be led by a dying wolf and a man's
cub. "They tell me," Shere Khan would say, "that at Council ye dare
not look him between the eyes." And the young wolves would growl and
bristle.

Bagheera, who had eyes and ears everywhere, knew something of this, and
once or twice he told Mowgli in so many words that Shere Khan would kill
him some day. Mowgli would laugh and answer: "I have the Pack and I have
thee; and Baloo, though he is so lazy, might strike a blow or two for my
sake. Why should I be afraid?"

It was one very warm day that a new notion came to Bagheera--born of
something that he had heard. Perhaps Ikki the Porcupine had told him;
but he said to Mowgli when they were deep in the jungle, as the boy lay
with his head on Bagheera's beautiful black skin, "Little Brother, how
often have I told thee that Shere Khan is thy enemy?"

"As many times as there are nuts on that palm," said Mowgli, who,
naturally, could not count. "What of it? I am sleepy, Bagheera, and
Shere Khan is all long tail and loud talk--like Mao, the Peacock."

"But this is no time for sleeping. Baloo knows it; I know it; the Pack
know it; and even the foolish, foolish deer know. Tabaqui has told thee
too."

"Ho! ho!" said Mowgli. "Tabaqui came to me not long ago with some rude
talk that I was a naked man's cub and not fit to dig pig-nuts. But I
caught Tabaqui by the tail and swung him twice against a palm-tree to
teach him better manners."

"That was foolishness, for though Tabaqui is a mischief-maker, he would
have told thee of something that concerned thee closely. Open those
eyes, Little Brother. Shere Khan dare not kill thee in the jungle. But
remember, Akela is very old, and soon the day comes when he cannot kill
his buck, and then he will be leader no more. Many of the wolves that
looked thee over when thou wast brought to the Council first are old
too, and the young wolves believe, as Shere Khan has taught them, that
a man-cub has no place with the Pack. In a little time thou wilt be a
man."

"And what is a man that he should not run with his brothers?" said
Mowgli. "I was born in the jungle. I have obeyed the Law of the Jungle,
and there is no wolf of ours from whose paws I have not pulled a thorn.
Surely they are my brothers!"

Bagheera stretched himself at full length and half shut his eyes.
"Little Brother," said he, "feel under my jaw."

Mowgli put up his strong brown hand, and just under Bagheera's silky
chin, where the giant rolling muscles were all hid by the glossy hair,
he came upon a little bald spot.

"There is no one in the jungle that knows that I, Bagheera, carry that
mark--the mark of the collar; and yet, Little Brother, I was born among
men, and it was among men that my mother died--in the cages of the
king's palace at Oodeypore. It was because of this that I paid the price
for thee at the Council when thou wast a little naked cub. Yes, I too
was born among men. I had never seen the jungle. They fed me behind
bars from an iron pan till one night I felt that I was Bagheera--the
Panther--and no man's plaything, and I broke the silly lock with one
blow of my paw and came away. And because I had learned the ways of men,
I became more terrible in the jungle than Shere Khan. Is it not so?"

"Yes," said Mowgli, "all the jungle fear Bagheera--all except Mowgli."

"Oh, thou art a man's cub," said the Black Panther very tenderly. "And
even as I returned to my jungle, so thou must go back to men at last--to
the men who are thy brothers--if thou art not killed in the Council."

"But why--but why should any wish to kill me?" said Mowgli.

"Look at me," said Bagheera. And Mowgli looked at him steadily between
the eyes. The big panther turned his head away in half a minute.

"That is why," he said, shifting his paw on the leaves. "Not even I can
look thee between the eyes, and I was born among men, and I love thee,
Little Brother. The others they hate thee because their eyes cannot meet
thine; because thou art wise; because thou hast pulled out thorns from
their feet--because thou art a man."

"I did not know these things," said Mowgli sullenly, and he frowned
under his heavy black eyebrows.

"What is the Law of the Jungle? Strike first and then give tongue. By
thy very carelessness they know that thou art a man. But be wise. It is
in my heart that when Akela misses his next kill--and at each hunt
it costs him more to pin the buck--the Pack will turn against him and
against thee. They will hold a jungle Council at the Rock, and then--and
then--I have it!" said Bagheera, leaping up. "Go thou down quickly to
the men's huts in the valley, and take some of the Red Flower which they
grow there, so that when the time comes thou mayest have even a stronger
friend than I or Baloo or those of the Pack that love thee. Get the Red
Flower."

By Red Flower Bagheera meant fire, only no creature in the jungle will
call fire by its proper name. Every beast lives in deadly fear of it,
and invents a hundred ways of describing it.

"The Red Flower?" said Mowgli. "That grows outside their huts in the
twilight. I will get some."

"There speaks the man's cub," said Bagheera proudly. "Remember that it
grows in little pots. Get one swiftly, and keep it by thee for time of
need."

"Good!" said Mowgli. "I go. But art thou sure, O my Bagheera"--he
slipped his arm around the splendid neck and looked deep into the big
eyes--"art thou sure that all this is Shere Khan's doing?"

"By the Broken Lock that freed me, I am sure, Little Brother."

"Then, by the Bull that bought me, I will pay Shere Khan full tale for
this, and it may be a little over," said Mowgli, and he bounded away.

"That is a man. That is all a man," said Bagheera to himself, lying down
again. "Oh, Shere Khan, never was a blacker hunting than that frog-hunt
of thine ten years ago!"

Mowgli was far and far through the forest, running hard, and his heart
was hot in him. He came to the cave as the evening mist rose, and drew
breath, and looked down the valley. The cubs were out, but Mother
Wolf, at the back of the cave, knew by his breathing that something was
troubling her frog.

"What is it, Son?" she said.

"Some bat's chatter of Shere Khan," he called back. "I hunt among the
plowed fields tonight," and he plunged downward through the bushes, to
the stream at the bottom of the valley. There he checked, for he heard
the yell of the Pack hunting, heard the bellow of a hunted Sambhur,
and the snort as the buck turned at bay. Then there were wicked, bitter
howls from the young wolves: "Akela! Akela! Let the Lone Wolf show his
strength. Room for the leader of the Pack! Spring, Akela!"

The Lone Wolf must have sprung and missed his hold, for Mowgli heard the
snap of his teeth and then a yelp as the Sambhur knocked him over with
his forefoot.

He did not wait for anything more, but dashed on; and the yells grew
fainter behind him as he ran into the croplands where the villagers
lived.

"Bagheera spoke truth," he panted, as he nestled down in some cattle
fodder by the window of a hut. "To-morrow is one day both for Akela and
for me."

Then he pressed his face close to the window and watched the fire on
the hearth. He saw the husbandman's wife get up and feed it in the night
with black lumps. And when the morning came and the mists were all white
and cold, he saw the man's child pick up a wicker pot plastered inside
with earth, fill it with lumps of red-hot charcoal, put it under his
blanket, and go out to tend the cows in the byre.

"Is that all?" said Mowgli. "If a cub can do it, there is nothing to
fear." So he strode round the corner and met the boy, took the pot from
his hand, and disappeared into the mist while the boy howled with fear.

"They are very like me," said Mowgli, blowing into the pot as he had
seen the woman do. "This thing will die if I do not give it things to
eat"; and he dropped twigs and dried bark on the red stuff. Halfway up
the hill he met Bagheera with the morning dew shining like moonstones on
his coat.

"Akela has missed," said the Panther. "They would have killed him last
night, but they needed thee also. They were looking for thee on the
hill."

"I was among the plowed lands. I am ready. See!" Mowgli held up the
fire-pot.

"Good! Now, I have seen men thrust a dry branch into that stuff, and
presently the Red Flower blossomed at the end of it. Art thou not
afraid?"

"No. Why should I fear? I remember now--if it is not a dream--how,
before I was a Wolf, I lay beside the Red Flower, and it was warm and
pleasant."

All that day Mowgli sat in the cave tending his fire pot and dipping
dry branches into it to see how they looked. He found a branch that
satisfied him, and in the evening when Tabaqui came to the cave and told
him rudely enough that he was wanted at the Council Rock, he laughed
till Tabaqui ran away. Then Mowgli went to the Council, still laughing.

Akela the Lone Wolf lay by the side of his rock as a sign that the
leadership of the Pack was open, and Shere Khan with his following of
scrap-fed wolves walked to and fro openly being flattered. Bagheera lay
close to Mowgli, and the fire pot was between Mowgli's knees. When they
were all gathered together, Shere Khan began to speak--a thing he would
never have dared to do when Akela was in his prime.

"He has no right," whispered Bagheera. "Say so. He is a dog's son. He
will be frightened."

Mowgli sprang to his feet. "Free People," he cried, "does Shere Khan
lead the Pack? What has a tiger to do with our leadership?"

"Seeing that the leadership is yet open, and being asked to speak--"
Shere Khan began.

"By whom?" said Mowgli. "Are we all jackals, to fawn on this cattle
butcher? The leadership of the Pack is with the Pack alone."

There were yells of "Silence, thou man's cub!" "Let him speak. He has
kept our Law"; and at last the seniors of the Pack thundered: "Let the
Dead Wolf speak." When a leader of the Pack has missed his kill, he is
called the Dead Wolf as long as he lives, which is not long.

Akela raised his old head wearily:--

"Free People, and ye too, jackals of Shere Khan, for twelve seasons I
have led ye to and from the kill, and in all that time not one has been
trapped or maimed. Now I have missed my kill. Ye know how that plot
was made. Ye know how ye brought me up to an untried buck to make my
weakness known. It was cleverly done. Your right is to kill me here on
the Council Rock, now. Therefore, I ask, who comes to make an end of the
Lone Wolf? For it is my right, by the Law of the Jungle, that ye come
one by one."

There was a long hush, for no single wolf cared to fight Akela to
the death. Then Shere Khan roared: "Bah! What have we to do with this
toothless fool? He is doomed to die! It is the man-cub who has lived too
long. Free People, he was my meat from the first. Give him to me. I
am weary of this man-wolf folly. He has troubled the jungle for ten
seasons. Give me the man-cub, or I will hunt here always, and not give
you one bone. He is a man, a man's child, and from the marrow of my
bones I hate him!"

Then more than half the Pack yelled: "A man! A man! What has a man to do
with us? Let him go to his own place."

"And turn all the people of the villages against us?" clamored Shere
Khan. "No, give him to me. He is a man, and none of us can look him
between the eyes."

Akela lifted his head again and said, "He has eaten our food. He has
slept with us. He has driven game for us. He has broken no word of the
Law of the Jungle."

"Also, I paid for him with a bull when he was accepted. The worth of a
bull is little, but Bagheera's honor is something that he will perhaps
fight for," said Bagheera in his gentlest voice.

"A bull paid ten years ago!" the Pack snarled. "What do we care for
bones ten years old?"

"Or for a pledge?" said Bagheera, his white teeth bared under his lip.
"Well are ye called the Free People!"

"No man's cub can run with the people of the jungle," howled Shere Khan.
"Give him to me!"

"He is our brother in all but blood," Akela went on, "and ye would kill
him here! In truth, I have lived too long. Some of ye are eaters of
cattle, and of others I have heard that, under Shere Khan's teaching,
ye go by dark night and snatch children from the villager's doorstep.
Therefore I know ye to be cowards, and it is to cowards I speak. It is
certain that I must die, and my life is of no worth, or I would offer
that in the man-cub's place. But for the sake of the Honor of
the Pack,--a little matter that by being without a leader ye have
forgotten,--I promise that if ye let the man-cub go to his own place, I
will not, when my time comes to die, bare one tooth against ye. I will
die without fighting. That will at least save the Pack three lives.
More I cannot do; but if ye will, I can save ye the shame that comes of
killing a brother against whom there is no fault--a brother spoken for
and bought into the Pack according to the Law of the Jungle."

"He is a man--a man--a man!" snarled the Pack. And most of the wolves
began to gather round Shere Khan, whose tail was beginning to switch.

"Now the business is in thy hands," said Bagheera to Mowgli. "We can do
no more except fight."

Mowgli stood upright--the fire pot in his hands. Then he stretched out
his arms, and yawned in the face of the Council; but he was furious with
rage and sorrow, for, wolflike, the wolves had never told him how they
hated him. "Listen you!" he cried. "There is no need for this dog's
jabber. Ye have told me so often tonight that I am a man (and indeed I
would have been a wolf with you to my life's end) that I feel your words
are true. So I do not call ye my brothers any more, but sag [dogs], as
a man should. What ye will do, and what ye will not do, is not yours
to say. That matter is with me; and that we may see the matter more
plainly, I, the man, have brought here a little of the Red Flower which
ye, dogs, fear."

He flung the fire pot on the ground, and some of the red coals lit
a tuft of dried moss that flared up, as all the Council drew back in
terror before the leaping flames.

Mowgli thrust his dead branch into the fire till the twigs lit and
crackled, and whirled it above his head among the cowering wolves.

"Thou art the master," said Bagheera in an undertone. "Save Akela from
the death. He was ever thy friend."

Akela, the grim old wolf who had never asked for mercy in his life, gave
one piteous look at Mowgli as the boy stood all naked, his long black
hair tossing over his shoulders in the light of the blazing branch that
made the shadows jump and quiver.

"Good!" said Mowgli, staring round slowly. "I see that ye are dogs. I go
from you to my own people--if they be my own people. The jungle is shut
to me, and I must forget your talk and your companionship. But I will be
more merciful than ye are. Because I was all but your brother in blood,
I promise that when I am a man among men I will not betray ye to men as
ye have betrayed me." He kicked the fire with his foot, and the sparks
flew up. "There shall be no war between any of us in the Pack. But here
is a debt to pay before I go." He strode forward to where Shere Khan sat
blinking stupidly at the flames, and caught him by the tuft on his chin.
Bagheera followed in case of accidents. "Up, dog!" Mowgli cried. "Up,
when a man speaks, or I will set that coat ablaze!"

Shere Khan's ears lay flat back on his head, and he shut his eyes, for
the blazing branch was very near.

"This cattle-killer said he would kill me in the Council because he had
not killed me when I was a cub. Thus and thus, then, do we beat dogs
when we are men. Stir a whisker, Lungri, and I ram the Red Flower down
thy gullet!" He beat Shere Khan over the head with the branch, and the
tiger whimpered and whined in an agony of fear.

"Pah! Singed jungle cat--go now! But remember when next I come to the
Council Rock, as a man should come, it will be with Shere Khan's hide
on my head. For the rest, Akela goes free to live as he pleases. Ye will
not kill him, because that is not my will. Nor do I think that ye
will sit here any longer, lolling out your tongues as though ye were
somebodies, instead of dogs whom I drive out--thus! Go!" The fire was
burning furiously at the end of the branch, and Mowgli struck right
and left round the circle, and the wolves ran howling with the sparks
burning their fur. At last there were only Akela, Bagheera, and perhaps
ten wolves that had taken Mowgli's part. Then something began to hurt
Mowgli inside him, as he had never been hurt in his life before, and he
caught his breath and sobbed, and the tears ran down his face.

"What is it? What is it?" he said. "I do not wish to leave the jungle,
and I do not know what this is. Am I dying, Bagheera?"

"No, Little Brother. That is only tears such as men use," said Bagheera.
"Now I know thou art a man, and a man's cub no longer. The jungle is
shut indeed to thee henceforward. Let them fall, Mowgli. They are only
tears." So Mowgli sat and cried as though his heart would break; and he
had never cried in all his life before.

"Now," he said, "I will go to men. But first I must say farewell to my
mother." And he went to the cave where she lived with Father Wolf, and
he cried on her coat, while the four cubs howled miserably.

"Ye will not forget me?" said Mowgli.

"Never while we can follow a trail," said the cubs. "Come to the foot of
the hill when thou art a man, and we will talk to thee; and we will come
into the croplands to play with thee by night."

"Come soon!" said Father Wolf. "Oh, wise little frog, come again soon;
for we be old, thy mother and I."

"Come soon," said Mother Wolf, "little naked son of mine. For, listen,
child of man, I loved thee more than ever I loved my cubs."

"I will surely come," said Mowgli. "And when I come it will be to lay
out Shere Khan's hide upon the Council Rock. Do not forget me! Tell them
in the jungle never to forget me!"

The dawn was beginning to break when Mowgli went down the hillside
alone, to meet those mysterious things that are called men.




Hunting-Song of the Seeonee Pack

     As the dawn was breaking the Sambhur belled
        Once, twice and again!
     And a doe leaped up, and a doe leaped up
     From the pond in the wood where the wild deer sup.
     This I, scouting alone, beheld,
        Once, twice and again!

     As the dawn was breaking the Sambhur belled
        Once, twice and again!
     And a wolf stole back, and a wolf stole back
     To carry the word to the waiting pack,
     And we sought and we found and we bayed on his track
        Once, twice and again!

     As the dawn was breaking the Wolf Pack yelled
        Once, twice and again!
     Feet in the jungle that leave no mark!

     Eyes that can see in the dark--the dark!
     Tongue--give tongue to it!  Hark!  O hark!
        Once, twice and again!




Kaa's Hunting

     His spots are the joy of the Leopard: his horns are the
        Buffalo's pride.
     Be clean, for the strength of the hunter is known by the
        gloss of his hide.
     If ye find that the Bullock can toss you, or the heavy-browed
        Sambhur can gore;
     Ye need not stop work to inform us: we knew it ten seasons
        before.
     Oppress not the cubs of the stranger, but hail them as Sister
        and Brother,
     For though they are little and fubsy, it may be the Bear is
        their mother.
     "There is none like to me!" says the Cub in the pride of his
        earliest kill;
     But the jungle is large and the Cub he is small.  Let him
        think and be still.
                                 Maxims of Baloo


All that is told here happened some time before Mowgli was turned out of
the Seeonee Wolf Pack, or revenged himself on Shere Khan the tiger. It
was in the days when Baloo was teaching him the Law of the Jungle. The
big, serious, old brown bear was delighted to have so quick a pupil,
for the young wolves will only learn as much of the Law of the Jungle
as applies to their own pack and tribe, and run away as soon as they can
repeat the Hunting Verse--"Feet that make no noise; eyes that can see in
the dark; ears that can hear the winds in their lairs, and sharp white
teeth, all these things are the marks of our brothers except Tabaqui the
Jackal and the Hyaena whom we hate." But Mowgli, as a man-cub, had to
learn a great deal more than this. Sometimes Bagheera the Black Panther
would come lounging through the jungle to see how his pet was getting
on, and would purr with his head against a tree while Mowgli recited the
day's lesson to Baloo. The boy could climb almost as well as he could
swim, and swim almost as well as he could run. So Baloo, the Teacher of
the Law, taught him the Wood and Water Laws: how to tell a rotten branch
from a sound one; how to speak politely to the wild bees when he came
upon a hive of them fifty feet above ground; what to say to Mang the
Bat when he disturbed him in the branches at midday; and how to warn the
water-snakes in the pools before he splashed down among them. None of
the Jungle People like being disturbed, and all are very ready to fly at
an intruder. Then, too, Mowgli was taught the Strangers' Hunting Call,
which must be repeated aloud till it is answered, whenever one of the
Jungle-People hunts outside his own grounds. It means, translated, "Give
me leave to hunt here because I am hungry." And the answer is, "Hunt
then for food, but not for pleasure."

All this will show you how much Mowgli had to learn by heart, and he
grew very tired of saying the same thing over a hundred times. But, as
Baloo said to Bagheera, one day when Mowgli had been cuffed and run off
in a temper, "A man's cub is a man's cub, and he must learn all the Law
of the Jungle."

"But think how small he is," said the Black Panther, who would have
spoiled Mowgli if he had had his own way. "How can his little head carry
all thy long talk?"

"Is there anything in the jungle too little to be killed? No. That is
why I teach him these things, and that is why I hit him, very softly,
when he forgets."

"Softly! What dost thou know of softness, old Iron-feet?" Bagheera
grunted. "His face is all bruised today by thy--softness. Ugh."

"Better he should be bruised from head to foot by me who love him than
that he should come to harm through ignorance," Baloo answered very
earnestly. "I am now teaching him the Master Words of the Jungle that
shall protect him with the birds and the Snake People, and all that hunt
on four feet, except his own pack. He can now claim protection, if he
will only remember the words, from all in the jungle. Is not that worth
a little beating?"

"Well, look to it then that thou dost not kill the man-cub. He is no
tree trunk to sharpen thy blunt claws upon. But what are those Master
Words? I am more likely to give help than to ask it"--Bagheera stretched
out one paw and admired the steel-blue, ripping-chisel talons at the end
of it--"still I should like to know."

"I will call Mowgli and he shall say them--if he will. Come, Little
Brother!"

"My head is ringing like a bee tree," said a sullen little voice over
their heads, and Mowgli slid down a tree trunk very angry and indignant,
adding as he reached the ground: "I come for Bagheera and not for thee,
fat old Baloo!"

"That is all one to me," said Baloo, though he was hurt and grieved.
"Tell Bagheera, then, the Master Words of the Jungle that I have taught
thee this day."

"Master Words for which people?" said Mowgli, delighted to show off.
"The jungle has many tongues. I know them all."

"A little thou knowest, but not much. See, O Bagheera, they never thank
their teacher. Not one small wolfling has ever come back to thank
old Baloo for his teachings. Say the word for the Hunting-People,
then--great scholar."

"We be of one blood, ye and I," said Mowgli, giving the words the Bear
accent which all the Hunting People use.

"Good. Now for the birds."

Mowgli repeated, with the Kite's whistle at the end of the sentence.

"Now for the Snake-People," said Bagheera.

The answer was a perfectly indescribable hiss, and Mowgli kicked up his
feet behind, clapped his hands together to applaud himself, and jumped
on to Bagheera's back, where he sat sideways, drumming with his heels on
the glossy skin and making the worst faces he could think of at Baloo.

"There--there! That was worth a little bruise," said the brown bear
tenderly. "Some day thou wilt remember me." Then he turned aside to
tell Bagheera how he had begged the Master Words from Hathi the Wild
Elephant, who knows all about these things, and how Hathi had taken
Mowgli down to a pool to get the Snake Word from a water-snake, because
Baloo could not pronounce it, and how Mowgli was now reasonably safe
against all accidents in the jungle, because neither snake, bird, nor
beast would hurt him.

"No one then is to be feared," Baloo wound up, patting his big furry
stomach with pride.

"Except his own tribe," said Bagheera, under his breath; and then aloud
to Mowgli, "Have a care for my ribs, Little Brother! What is all this
dancing up and down?"

Mowgli had been trying to make himself heard by pulling at Bagheera's
shoulder fur and kicking hard. When the two listened to him he was
shouting at the top of his voice, "And so I shall have a tribe of my
own, and lead them through the branches all day long."

"What is this new folly, little dreamer of dreams?" said Bagheera.

"Yes, and throw branches and dirt at old Baloo," Mowgli went on. "They
have promised me this. Ah!"

"Whoof!" Baloo's big paw scooped Mowgli off Bagheera's back, and as the
boy lay between the big fore-paws he could see the Bear was angry.

"Mowgli," said Baloo, "thou hast been talking with the Bandar-log--the
Monkey People."

Mowgli looked at Bagheera to see if the Panther was angry too, and
Bagheera's eyes were as hard as jade stones.

"Thou hast been with the Monkey People--the gray apes--the people
without a law--the eaters of everything. That is great shame."

"When Baloo hurt my head," said Mowgli (he was still on his back), "I
went away, and the gray apes came down from the trees and had pity on
me. No one else cared." He snuffled a little.

"The pity of the Monkey People!" Baloo snorted. "The stillness of the
mountain stream! The cool of the summer sun! And then, man-cub?"

"And then, and then, they gave me nuts and pleasant things to eat, and
they--they carried me in their arms up to the top of the trees and said
I was their blood brother except that I had no tail, and should be their
leader some day."

"They have no leader," said Bagheera. "They lie. They have always lied."

"They were very kind and bade me come again. Why have I never been taken
among the Monkey People? They stand on their feet as I do. They do
not hit me with their hard paws. They play all day. Let me get up! Bad
Baloo, let me up! I will play with them again."

"Listen, man-cub," said the Bear, and his voice rumbled like thunder on
a hot night. "I have taught thee all the Law of the Jungle for all the
peoples of the jungle--except the Monkey-Folk who live in the trees.
They have no law. They are outcasts. They have no speech of their own,
but use the stolen words which they overhear when they listen, and peep,
and wait up above in the branches. Their way is not our way. They are
without leaders. They have no remembrance. They boast and chatter and
pretend that they are a great people about to do great affairs in the
jungle, but the falling of a nut turns their minds to laughter and all
is forgotten. We of the jungle have no dealings with them. We do not
drink where the monkeys drink; we do not go where the monkeys go; we do
not hunt where they hunt; we do not die where they die. Hast thou ever
heard me speak of the Bandar-log till today?"

"No," said Mowgli in a whisper, for the forest was very still now Baloo
had finished.

"The Jungle-People put them out of their mouths and out of their minds.
They are very many, evil, dirty, shameless, and they desire, if they
have any fixed desire, to be noticed by the Jungle People. But we do not
notice them even when they throw nuts and filth on our heads."

He had hardly spoken when a shower of nuts and twigs spattered down
through the branches; and they could hear coughings and howlings and
angry jumpings high up in the air among the thin branches.

"The Monkey-People are forbidden," said Baloo, "forbidden to the
Jungle-People. Remember."

"Forbidden," said Bagheera, "but I still think Baloo should have warned
thee against them."

"I--I? How was I to guess he would play with such dirt. The Monkey
People! Faugh!"

A fresh shower came down on their heads and the two trotted away, taking
Mowgli with them. What Baloo had said about the monkeys was perfectly
true. They belonged to the tree-tops, and as beasts very seldom look
up, there was no occasion for the monkeys and the Jungle-People to cross
each other's path. But whenever they found a sick wolf, or a wounded
tiger, or bear, the monkeys would torment him, and would throw sticks
and nuts at any beast for fun and in the hope of being noticed. Then
they would howl and shriek senseless songs, and invite the Jungle-People
to climb up their trees and fight them, or would start furious battles
over nothing among themselves, and leave the dead monkeys where the
Jungle-People could see them. They were always just going to have a
leader, and laws and customs of their own, but they never did, because
their memories would not hold over from day to day, and so they
compromised things by making up a saying, "What the Bandar-log think now
the jungle will think later," and that comforted them a great deal. None
of the beasts could reach them, but on the other hand none of the beasts
would notice them, and that was why they were so pleased when Mowgli
came to play with them, and they heard how angry Baloo was.

They never meant to do any more--the Bandar-log never mean anything at
all; but one of them invented what seemed to him a brilliant idea, and
he told all the others that Mowgli would be a useful person to keep in
the tribe, because he could weave sticks together for protection from
the wind; so, if they caught him, they could make him teach them.
Of course Mowgli, as a woodcutter's child, inherited all sorts of
instincts, and used to make little huts of fallen branches without
thinking how he came to do it. The Monkey-People, watching in the trees,
considered his play most wonderful. This time, they said, they were
really going to have a leader and become the wisest people in the
jungle--so wise that everyone else would notice and envy them. Therefore
they followed Baloo and Bagheera and Mowgli through the jungle very
quietly till it was time for the midday nap, and Mowgli, who was
very much ashamed of himself, slept between the Panther and the Bear,
resolving to have no more to do with the Monkey People.

The next thing he remembered was feeling hands on his legs and
arms--hard, strong, little hands--and then a swash of branches in his
face, and then he was staring down through the swaying boughs as Baloo
woke the jungle with his deep cries and Bagheera bounded up the trunk
with every tooth bared. The Bandar-log howled with triumph and scuffled
away to the upper branches where Bagheera dared not follow, shouting:
"He has noticed us! Bagheera has noticed us. All the Jungle-People
admire us for our skill and our cunning." Then they began their flight;
and the flight of the Monkey-People through tree-land is one of
the things nobody can describe. They have their regular roads and
crossroads, up hills and down hills, all laid out from fifty to seventy
or a hundred feet above ground, and by these they can travel even at
night if necessary. Two of the strongest monkeys caught Mowgli under
the arms and swung off with him through the treetops, twenty feet at a
bound. Had they been alone they could have gone twice as fast, but the
boy's weight held them back. Sick and giddy as Mowgli was he could not
help enjoying the wild rush, though the glimpses of earth far down below
frightened him, and the terrible check and jerk at the end of the swing
over nothing but empty air brought his heart between his teeth. His
escort would rush him up a tree till he felt the thinnest topmost
branches crackle and bend under them, and then with a cough and a whoop
would fling themselves into the air outward and downward, and bring
up, hanging by their hands or their feet to the lower limbs of the next
tree. Sometimes he could see for miles and miles across the still green
jungle, as a man on the top of a mast can see for miles across the sea,
and then the branches and leaves would lash him across the face, and he
and his two guards would be almost down to earth again. So, bounding and
crashing and whooping and yelling, the whole tribe of Bandar-log swept
along the tree-roads with Mowgli their prisoner.

For a time he was afraid of being dropped. Then he grew angry but knew
better than to struggle, and then he began to think. The first thing was
to send back word to Baloo and Bagheera, for, at the pace the monkeys
were going, he knew his friends would be left far behind. It was useless
to look down, for he could only see the topsides of the branches, so he
stared upward and saw, far away in the blue, Rann the Kite balancing
and wheeling as he kept watch over the jungle waiting for things to die.
Rann saw that the monkeys were carrying something, and dropped a
few hundred yards to find out whether their load was good to eat. He
whistled with surprise when he saw Mowgli being dragged up to a treetop
and heard him give the Kite call for--"We be of one blood, thou and I."
The waves of the branches closed over the boy, but Chil balanced away to
the next tree in time to see the little brown face come up again. "Mark
my trail!" Mowgli shouted. "Tell Baloo of the Seeonee Pack and Bagheera
of the Council Rock."

"In whose name, Brother?" Rann had never seen Mowgli before, though of
course he had heard of him.

"Mowgli, the Frog. Man-cub they call me! Mark my tra-il!"

The last words were shrieked as he was being swung through the air, but
Rann nodded and rose up till he looked no bigger than a speck of dust,
and there he hung, watching with his telescope eyes the swaying of the
treetops as Mowgli's escort whirled along.

"They never go far," he said with a chuckle. "They never do what they
set out to do. Always pecking at new things are the Bandar-log. This
time, if I have any eye-sight, they have pecked down trouble for
themselves, for Baloo is no fledgling and Bagheera can, as I know, kill
more than goats."

So he rocked on his wings, his feet gathered up under him, and waited.

Meantime, Baloo and Bagheera were furious with rage and grief. Bagheera
climbed as he had never climbed before, but the thin branches broke
beneath his weight, and he slipped down, his claws full of bark.

"Why didst thou not warn the man-cub?" he roared to poor Baloo, who had
set off at a clumsy trot in the hope of overtaking the monkeys. "What
was the use of half slaying him with blows if thou didst not warn him?"

"Haste! O haste! We--we may catch them yet!" Baloo panted.

"At that speed! It would not tire a wounded cow. Teacher of the
Law--cub-beater--a mile of that rolling to and fro would burst thee
open. Sit still and think! Make a plan. This is no time for chasing.
They may drop him if we follow too close."

"Arrula! Whoo! They may have dropped him already, being tired of
carrying him. Who can trust the Bandar-log? Put dead bats on my head!
Give me black bones to eat! Roll me into the hives of the wild bees
that I may be stung to death, and bury me with the Hyaena, for I am most
miserable of bears! Arulala! Wahooa! O Mowgli, Mowgli! Why did I not
warn thee against the Monkey-Folk instead of breaking thy head? Now
perhaps I may have knocked the day's lesson out of his mind, and he will
be alone in the jungle without the Master Words."

Baloo clasped his paws over his ears and rolled to and fro moaning.

"At least he gave me all the Words correctly a little time ago," said
Bagheera impatiently. "Baloo, thou hast neither memory nor respect. What
would the jungle think if I, the Black Panther, curled myself up like
Ikki the Porcupine, and howled?"

"What do I care what the jungle thinks? He may be dead by now."

"Unless and until they drop him from the branches in sport, or kill him
out of idleness, I have no fear for the man-cub. He is wise and well
taught, and above all he has the eyes that make the Jungle-People
afraid. But (and it is a great evil) he is in the power of the
Bandar-log, and they, because they live in trees, have no fear of any of
our people." Bagheera licked one forepaw thoughtfully.

"Fool that I am! Oh, fat, brown, root-digging fool that I am," said
Baloo, uncoiling himself with a jerk, "it is true what Hathi the Wild
Elephant says: `To each his own fear'; and they, the Bandar-log, fear
Kaa the Rock Snake. He can climb as well as they can. He steals the
young monkeys in the night. The whisper of his name makes their wicked
tails cold. Let us go to Kaa."

"What will he do for us? He is not of our tribe, being footless--and
with most evil eyes," said Bagheera.

"He is very old and very cunning. Above all, he is always hungry," said
Baloo hopefully. "Promise him many goats."

"He sleeps for a full month after he has once eaten. He may be asleep
now, and even were he awake what if he would rather kill his own goats?"
Bagheera, who did not know much about Kaa, was naturally suspicious.

"Then in that case, thou and I together, old hunter, might make him see
reason." Here Baloo rubbed his faded brown shoulder against the Panther,
and they went off to look for Kaa the Rock Python.

They found him stretched out on a warm ledge in the afternoon sun,
admiring his beautiful new coat, for he had been in retirement for the
last ten days changing his skin, and now he was very splendid--darting
his big blunt-nosed head along the ground, and twisting the thirty feet
of his body into fantastic knots and curves, and licking his lips as he
thought of his dinner to come.

"He has not eaten," said Baloo, with a grunt of relief, as soon as
he saw the beautifully mottled brown and yellow jacket. "Be careful,
Bagheera! He is always a little blind after he has changed his skin, and
very quick to strike."

Kaa was not a poison snake--in fact he rather despised the poison snakes
as cowards--but his strength lay in his hug, and when he had once
lapped his huge coils round anybody there was no more to be said. "Good
hunting!" cried Baloo, sitting up on his haunches. Like all snakes of
his breed Kaa was rather deaf, and did not hear the call at first. Then
he curled up ready for any accident, his head lowered.

"Good hunting for us all," he answered. "Oho, Baloo, what dost thou do
here? Good hunting, Bagheera. One of us at least needs food. Is there
any news of game afoot? A doe now, or even a young buck? I am as empty
as a dried well."

"We are hunting," said Baloo carelessly. He knew that you must not hurry
Kaa. He is too big.

"Give me permission to come with you," said Kaa. "A blow more or less is
nothing to thee, Bagheera or Baloo, but I--I have to wait and wait for
days in a wood-path and climb half a night on the mere chance of a
young ape. Psshaw! The branches are not what they were when I was young.
Rotten twigs and dry boughs are they all."

"Maybe thy great weight has something to do with the matter," said
Baloo.

"I am a fair length--a fair length," said Kaa with a little pride. "But
for all that, it is the fault of this new-grown timber. I came very
near to falling on my last hunt--very near indeed--and the noise of my
slipping, for my tail was not tight wrapped around the tree, waked the
Bandar-log, and they called me most evil names."

"Footless, yellow earth-worm," said Bagheera under his whiskers, as
though he were trying to remember something.

"Sssss! Have they ever called me that?" said Kaa.

"Something of that kind it was that they shouted to us last moon, but we
never noticed them. They will say anything--even that thou hast lost all
thy teeth, and wilt not face anything bigger than a kid, because (they
are indeed shameless, these Bandar-log)--because thou art afraid of the
he-goat's horns," Bagheera went on sweetly.

Now a snake, especially a wary old python like Kaa, very seldom shows
that he is angry, but Baloo and Bagheera could see the big swallowing
muscles on either side of Kaa's throat ripple and bulge.

"The Bandar-log have shifted their grounds," he said quietly. "When I
came up into the sun today I heard them whooping among the tree-tops."

"It--it is the Bandar-log that we follow now," said Baloo, but the words
stuck in his throat, for that was the first time in his memory that one
of the Jungle-People had owned to being interested in the doings of the
monkeys.

"Beyond doubt then it is no small thing that takes two such
hunters--leaders in their own jungle I am certain--on the trail of the
Bandar-log," Kaa replied courteously, as he swelled with curiosity.

"Indeed," Baloo began, "I am no more than the old and sometimes very
foolish Teacher of the Law to the Seeonee wolf-cubs, and Bagheera
here--"

"Is Bagheera," said the Black Panther, and his jaws shut with a snap,
for he did not believe in being humble. "The trouble is this, Kaa. Those
nut-stealers and pickers of palm leaves have stolen away our man-cub of
whom thou hast perhaps heard."

"I heard some news from Ikki (his quills make him presumptuous) of a
man-thing that was entered into a wolf pack, but I did not believe. Ikki
is full of stories half heard and very badly told."

"But it is true. He is such a man-cub as never was," said Baloo. "The
best and wisest and boldest of man-cubs--my own pupil, who shall
make the name of Baloo famous through all the jungles; and besides,
I--we--love him, Kaa."

"Ts! Ts!" said Kaa, weaving his head to and fro. "I also have known what
love is. There are tales I could tell that--"

"That need a clear night when we are all well fed to praise properly,"
said Bagheera quickly. "Our man-cub is in the hands of the Bandar-log
now, and we know that of all the Jungle-People they fear Kaa alone."

"They fear me alone. They have good reason," said Kaa. "Chattering,
foolish, vain--vain, foolish, and chattering, are the monkeys. But a
man-thing in their hands is in no good luck. They grow tired of the nuts
they pick, and throw them down. They carry a branch half a day, meaning
to do great things with it, and then they snap it in two. That man-thing
is not to be envied. They called me also--`yellow fish' was it not?"

"Worm--worm--earth-worm," said Bagheera, "as well as other things which
I cannot now say for shame."

"We must remind them to speak well of their master. Aaa-ssp! We must
help their wandering memories. Now, whither went they with the cub?"

"The jungle alone knows. Toward the sunset, I believe," said Baloo. "We
had thought that thou wouldst know, Kaa."

"I? How? I take them when they come in my way, but I do not hunt the
Bandar-log, or frogs--or green scum on a water-hole, for that matter."

"Up, Up! Up, Up! Hillo! Illo! Illo, look up, Baloo of the Seeonee Wolf
Pack!"

Baloo looked up to see where the voice came from, and there was Rann the
Kite, sweeping down with the sun shining on the upturned flanges of his
wings. It was near Rann's bedtime, but he had ranged all over the jungle
looking for the Bear and had missed him in the thick foliage.

"What is it?" said Baloo.

"I have seen Mowgli among the Bandar-log. He bade me tell you. I
watched. The Bandar-log have taken him beyond the river to the monkey
city--to the Cold Lairs. They may stay there for a night, or ten nights,
or an hour. I have told the bats to watch through the dark time. That is
my message. Good hunting, all you below!"

"Full gorge and a deep sleep to you, Rann," cried Bagheera. "I will
remember thee in my next kill, and put aside the head for thee alone, O
best of kites!"

"It is nothing. It is nothing. The boy held the Master Word. I could
have done no less," and Rann circled up again to his roost.

"He has not forgotten to use his tongue," said Baloo with a chuckle of
pride. "To think of one so young remembering the Master Word for the
birds too while he was being pulled across trees!"

"It was most firmly driven into him," said Bagheera. "But I am proud of
him, and now we must go to the Cold Lairs."

They all knew where that place was, but few of the Jungle People ever
went there, because what they called the Cold Lairs was an old deserted
city, lost and buried in the jungle, and beasts seldom use a place that
men have once used. The wild boar will, but the hunting tribes do not.
Besides, the monkeys lived there as much as they could be said to live
anywhere, and no self-respecting animal would come within eyeshot of it
except in times of drought, when the half-ruined tanks and reservoirs
held a little water.

"It is half a night's journey--at full speed," said Bagheera, and Baloo
looked very serious. "I will go as fast as I can," he said anxiously.

"We dare not wait for thee. Follow, Baloo. We must go on the
quick-foot--Kaa and I."

"Feet or no feet, I can keep abreast of all thy four," said Kaa shortly.
Baloo made one effort to hurry, but had to sit down panting, and so they
left him to come on later, while Bagheera hurried forward, at the quick
panther-canter. Kaa said nothing, but, strive as Bagheera might, the
huge Rock-python held level with him. When they came to a hill stream,
Bagheera gained, because he bounded across while Kaa swam, his head and
two feet of his neck clearing the water, but on level ground Kaa made up
the distance.

"By the Broken Lock that freed me," said Bagheera, when twilight had
fallen, "thou art no slow goer!"

"I am hungry," said Kaa. "Besides, they called me speckled frog."

"Worm--earth-worm, and yellow to boot."

"All one. Let us go on," and Kaa seemed to pour himself along the
ground, finding the shortest road with his steady eyes, and keeping to
it.

In the Cold Lairs the Monkey-People were not thinking of Mowgli's
friends at all. They had brought the boy to the Lost City, and were
very much pleased with themselves for the time. Mowgli had never seen an
Indian city before, and though this was almost a heap of ruins it seemed
very wonderful and splendid. Some king had built it long ago on a little
hill. You could still trace the stone causeways that led up to the
ruined gates where the last splinters of wood hung to the worn, rusted
hinges. Trees had grown into and out of the walls; the battlements were
tumbled down and decayed, and wild creepers hung out of the windows of
the towers on the walls in bushy hanging clumps.

A great roofless palace crowned the hill, and the marble of the
courtyards and the fountains was split, and stained with red and green,
and the very cobblestones in the courtyard where the king's elephants
used to live had been thrust up and apart by grasses and young trees.
From the palace you could see the rows and rows of roofless houses that
made up the city looking like empty honeycombs filled with blackness;
the shapeless block of stone that had been an idol in the square where
four roads met; the pits and dimples at street corners where the public
wells once stood, and the shattered domes of temples with wild figs
sprouting on their sides. The monkeys called the place their city, and
pretended to despise the Jungle-People because they lived in the forest.
And yet they never knew what the buildings were made for nor how to
use them. They would sit in circles on the hall of the king's council
chamber, and scratch for fleas and pretend to be men; or they would run
in and out of the roofless houses and collect pieces of plaster and old
bricks in a corner, and forget where they had hidden them, and fight
and cry in scuffling crowds, and then break off to play up and down the
terraces of the king's garden, where they would shake the rose trees and
the oranges in sport to see the fruit and flowers fall. They explored
all the passages and dark tunnels in the palace and the hundreds of
little dark rooms, but they never remembered what they had seen and what
they had not; and so drifted about in ones and twos or crowds telling
each other that they were doing as men did. They drank at the tanks and
made the water all muddy, and then they fought over it, and then they
would all rush together in mobs and shout: "There is no one in the
jungle so wise and good and clever and strong and gentle as the
Bandar-log." Then all would begin again till they grew tired of the city
and went back to the tree-tops, hoping the Jungle-People would notice
them.

Mowgli, who had been trained under the Law of the Jungle, did not like
or understand this kind of life. The monkeys dragged him into the Cold
Lairs late in the afternoon, and instead of going to sleep, as Mowgli
would have done after a long journey, they joined hands and danced about
and sang their foolish songs. One of the monkeys made a speech and told
his companions that Mowgli's capture marked a new thing in the history
of the Bandar-log, for Mowgli was going to show them how to weave sticks
and canes together as a protection against rain and cold. Mowgli picked
up some creepers and began to work them in and out, and the monkeys
tried to imitate; but in a very few minutes they lost interest and began
to pull their friends' tails or jump up and down on all fours, coughing.

"I wish to eat," said Mowgli. "I am a stranger in this part of the
jungle. Bring me food, or give me leave to hunt here."

Twenty or thirty monkeys bounded away to bring him nuts and wild
pawpaws. But they fell to fighting on the road, and it was too much
trouble to go back with what was left of the fruit. Mowgli was sore and
angry as well as hungry, and he roamed through the empty city giving the
Strangers' Hunting Call from time to time, but no one answered him, and
Mowgli felt that he had reached a very bad place indeed. "All that Baloo
has said about the Bandar-log is true," he thought to himself. "They
have no Law, no Hunting Call, and no leaders--nothing but foolish words
and little picking thievish hands. So if I am starved or killed here,
it will be all my own fault. But I must try to return to my own jungle.
Baloo will surely beat me, but that is better than chasing silly rose
leaves with the Bandar-log."

No sooner had he walked to the city wall than the monkeys pulled him
back, telling him that he did not know how happy he was, and pinching
him to make him grateful. He set his teeth and said nothing, but
went with the shouting monkeys to a terrace above the red sandstone
reservoirs that were half-full of rain water. There was a ruined
summer-house of white marble in the center of the terrace, built for
queens dead a hundred years ago. The domed roof had half fallen in and
blocked up the underground passage from the palace by which the
queens used to enter. But the walls were made of screens of marble
tracery--beautiful milk-white fretwork, set with agates and cornelians
and jasper and lapis lazuli, and as the moon came up behind the hill it
shone through the open work, casting shadows on the ground like black
velvet embroidery. Sore, sleepy, and hungry as he was, Mowgli could not
help laughing when the Bandar-log began, twenty at a time, to tell him
how great and wise and strong and gentle they were, and how foolish he
was to wish to leave them. "We are great. We are free. We are wonderful.
We are the most wonderful people in all the jungle! We all say so, and
so it must be true," they shouted. "Now as you are a new listener and
can carry our words back to the Jungle-People so that they may notice us
in future, we will tell you all about our most excellent selves." Mowgli
made no objection, and the monkeys gathered by hundreds and hundreds on
the terrace to listen to their own speakers singing the praises of the
Bandar-log, and whenever a speaker stopped for want of breath they would
all shout together: "This is true; we all say so." Mowgli nodded and
blinked, and said "Yes" when they asked him a question, and his head
spun with the noise. "Tabaqui the Jackal must have bitten all these
people," he said to himself, "and now they have madness. Certainly this
is dewanee, the madness. Do they never go to sleep? Now there is a cloud
coming to cover that moon. If it were only a big enough cloud I might
try to run away in the darkness. But I am tired."

That same cloud was being watched by two good friends in the ruined
ditch below the city wall, for Bagheera and Kaa, knowing well how
dangerous the Monkey-People were in large numbers, did not wish to run
any risks. The monkeys never fight unless they are a hundred to one, and
few in the jungle care for those odds.

"I will go to the west wall," Kaa whispered, "and come down swiftly with
the slope of the ground in my favor. They will not throw themselves upon
my back in their hundreds, but--"

"I know it," said Bagheera. "Would that Baloo were here, but we must do
what we can. When that cloud covers the moon I shall go to the terrace.
They hold some sort of council there over the boy."

"Good hunting," said Kaa grimly, and glided away to the west wall. That
happened to be the least ruined of any, and the big snake was delayed
awhile before he could find a way up the stones. The cloud hid the moon,
and as Mowgli wondered what would come next he heard Bagheera's light
feet on the terrace. The Black Panther had raced up the slope almost
without a sound and was striking--he knew better than to waste time in
biting--right and left among the monkeys, who were seated round Mowgli
in circles fifty and sixty deep. There was a howl of fright and rage,
and then as Bagheera tripped on the rolling kicking bodies beneath him,
a monkey shouted: "There is only one here! Kill him! Kill." A scuffling
mass of monkeys, biting, scratching, tearing, and pulling, closed over
Bagheera, while five or six laid hold of Mowgli, dragged him up the wall
of the summerhouse and pushed him through the hole of the broken dome.
A man-trained boy would have been badly bruised, for the fall was a
good fifteen feet, but Mowgli fell as Baloo had taught him to fall, and
landed on his feet.

"Stay there," shouted the monkeys, "till we have killed thy friends, and
later we will play with thee--if the Poison-People leave thee alive."

"We be of one blood, ye and I," said Mowgli, quickly giving the Snake's
Call. He could hear rustling and hissing in the rubbish all round him
and gave the Call a second time, to make sure.

"Even ssso! Down hoods all!" said half a dozen low voices (every ruin
in India becomes sooner or later a dwelling place of snakes, and the old
summerhouse was alive with cobras). "Stand still, Little Brother, for
thy feet may do us harm."

Mowgli stood as quietly as he could, peering through the open work and
listening to the furious din of the fight round the Black Panther--the
yells and chatterings and scufflings, and Bagheera's deep, hoarse cough
as he backed and bucked and twisted and plunged under the heaps of his
enemies. For the first time since he was born, Bagheera was fighting for
his life.

"Baloo must be at hand; Bagheera would not have come alone," Mowgli
thought. And then he called aloud: "To the tank, Bagheera. Roll to the
water tanks. Roll and plunge! Get to the water!"

Bagheera heard, and the cry that told him Mowgli was safe gave him new
courage. He worked his way desperately, inch by inch, straight for the
reservoirs, halting in silence. Then from the ruined wall nearest the
jungle rose up the rumbling war-shout of Baloo. The old Bear had done
his best, but he could not come before. "Bagheera," he shouted, "I am
here. I climb! I haste! Ahuwora! The stones slip under my feet! Wait my
coming, O most infamous Bandar-log!" He panted up the terrace only
to disappear to the head in a wave of monkeys, but he threw himself
squarely on his haunches, and, spreading out his forepaws, hugged as
many as he could hold, and then began to hit with a regular bat-bat-bat,
like the flipping strokes of a paddle wheel. A crash and a splash told
Mowgli that Bagheera had fought his way to the tank where the monkeys
could not follow. The Panther lay gasping for breath, his head just
out of the water, while the monkeys stood three deep on the red steps,
dancing up and down with rage, ready to spring upon him from all sides
if he came out to help Baloo. It was then that Bagheera lifted up his
dripping chin, and in despair gave the Snake's Call for protection--"We
be of one blood, ye and I"--for he believed that Kaa had turned tail
at the last minute. Even Baloo, half smothered under the monkeys on
the edge of the terrace, could not help chuckling as he heard the Black
Panther asking for help.

Kaa had only just worked his way over the west wall, landing with a
wrench that dislodged a coping stone into the ditch. He had no intention
of losing any advantage of the ground, and coiled and uncoiled himself
once or twice, to be sure that every foot of his long body was in
working order. All that while the fight with Baloo went on, and the
monkeys yelled in the tank round Bagheera, and Mang the Bat, flying to
and fro, carried the news of the great battle over the jungle, till even
Hathi the Wild Elephant trumpeted, and, far away, scattered bands of
the Monkey-Folk woke and came leaping along the tree-roads to help their
comrades in the Cold Lairs, and the noise of the fight roused all the
day birds for miles round. Then Kaa came straight, quickly, and anxious
to kill. The fighting strength of a python is in the driving blow of
his head backed by all the strength and weight of his body. If you can
imagine a lance, or a battering ram, or a hammer weighing nearly half
a ton driven by a cool, quiet mind living in the handle of it, you can
roughly imagine what Kaa was like when he fought. A python four or five
feet long can knock a man down if he hits him fairly in the chest, and
Kaa was thirty feet long, as you know. His first stroke was delivered
into the heart of the crowd round Baloo. It was sent home with shut
mouth in silence, and there was no need of a second. The monkeys
scattered with cries of--"Kaa! It is Kaa! Run! Run!"

Generations of monkeys had been scared into good behavior by the stories
their elders told them of Kaa, the night thief, who could slip along the
branches as quietly as moss grows, and steal away the strongest monkey
that ever lived; of old Kaa, who could make himself look so like a dead
branch or a rotten stump that the wisest were deceived, till the branch
caught them. Kaa was everything that the monkeys feared in the jungle,
for none of them knew the limits of his power, none of them could look
him in the face, and none had ever come alive out of his hug. And so
they ran, stammering with terror, to the walls and the roofs of the
houses, and Baloo drew a deep breath of relief. His fur was much thicker
than Bagheera's, but he had suffered sorely in the fight. Then Kaa
opened his mouth for the first time and spoke one long hissing word, and
the far-away monkeys, hurrying to the defense of the Cold Lairs, stayed
where they were, cowering, till the loaded branches bent and crackled
under them. The monkeys on the walls and the empty houses stopped
their cries, and in the stillness that fell upon the city Mowgli heard
Bagheera shaking his wet sides as he came up from the tank. Then the
clamor broke out again. The monkeys leaped higher up the walls. They
clung around the necks of the big stone idols and shrieked as they
skipped along the battlements, while Mowgli, dancing in the summerhouse,
put his eye to the screenwork and hooted owl-fashion between his front
teeth, to show his derision and contempt.

"Get the man-cub out of that trap; I can do no more," Bagheera gasped.
"Let us take the man-cub and go. They may attack again."

"They will not move till I order them. Stay you sssso!" Kaa hissed, and
the city was silent once more. "I could not come before, Brother, but I
think I heard thee call"--this was to Bagheera.

"I--I may have cried out in the battle," Bagheera answered. "Baloo, art
thou hurt?

"I am not sure that they did not pull me into a hundred little
bearlings," said Baloo, gravely shaking one leg after the other. "Wow! I
am sore. Kaa, we owe thee, I think, our lives--Bagheera and I."

"No matter. Where is the manling?"

"Here, in a trap. I cannot climb out," cried Mowgli. The curve of the
broken dome was above his head.

"Take him away. He dances like Mao the Peacock. He will crush our
young," said the cobras inside.

"Hah!" said Kaa with a chuckle, "he has friends everywhere, this
manling. Stand back, manling. And hide you, O Poison People. I break
down the wall."

Kaa looked carefully till he found a discolored crack in the marble
tracery showing a weak spot, made two or three light taps with his head
to get the distance, and then lifting up six feet of his body clear
of the ground, sent home half a dozen full-power smashing blows,
nose-first. The screen-work broke and fell away in a cloud of dust and
rubbish, and Mowgli leaped through the opening and flung himself between
Baloo and Bagheera--an arm around each big neck.

"Art thou hurt?" said Baloo, hugging him softly.

"I am sore, hungry, and not a little bruised. But, oh, they have handled
ye grievously, my Brothers! Ye bleed."

"Others also," said Bagheera, licking his lips and looking at the
monkey-dead on the terrace and round the tank.

"It is nothing, it is nothing, if thou art safe, oh, my pride of all
little frogs!" whimpered Baloo.

"Of that we shall judge later," said Bagheera, in a dry voice that
Mowgli did not at all like. "But here is Kaa to whom we owe the battle
and thou owest thy life. Thank him according to our customs, Mowgli."

Mowgli turned and saw the great Python's head swaying a foot above his
own.

"So this is the manling," said Kaa. "Very soft is his skin, and he is
not unlike the Bandar-log. Have a care, manling, that I do not mistake
thee for a monkey some twilight when I have newly changed my coat."

"We be one blood, thou and I," Mowgli answered. "I take my life from
thee tonight. My kill shall be thy kill if ever thou art hungry, O Kaa."

"All thanks, Little Brother," said Kaa, though his eyes twinkled. "And
what may so bold a hunter kill? I ask that I may follow when next he
goes abroad."

"I kill nothing,--I am too little,--but I drive goats toward such as can
use them. When thou art empty come to me and see if I speak the truth.
I have some skill in these [he held out his hands], and if ever thou art
in a trap, I may pay the debt which I owe to thee, to Bagheera, and to
Baloo, here. Good hunting to ye all, my masters."

"Well said," growled Baloo, for Mowgli had returned thanks very
prettily. The Python dropped his head lightly for a minute on Mowgli's
shoulder. "A brave heart and a courteous tongue," said he. "They shall
carry thee far through the jungle, manling. But now go hence quickly
with thy friends. Go and sleep, for the moon sets, and what follows it
is not well that thou shouldst see."

The moon was sinking behind the hills and the lines of trembling monkeys
huddled together on the walls and battlements looked like ragged shaky
fringes of things. Baloo went down to the tank for a drink and Bagheera
began to put his fur in order, as Kaa glided out into the center of the
terrace and brought his jaws together with a ringing snap that drew all
the monkeys' eyes upon him.

"The moon sets," he said. "Is there yet light enough to see?"

From the walls came a moan like the wind in the tree-tops--"We see, O
Kaa."

"Good. Begins now the dance--the Dance of the Hunger of Kaa. Sit still
and watch."

He turned twice or thrice in a big circle, weaving his head from right
to left. Then he began making loops and figures of eight with his
body, and soft, oozy triangles that melted into squares and five-sided
figures, and coiled mounds, never resting, never hurrying, and never
stopping his low humming song. It grew darker and darker, till at last
the dragging, shifting coils disappeared, but they could hear the rustle
of the scales.

Baloo and Bagheera stood still as stone, growling in their throats,
their neck hair bristling, and Mowgli watched and wondered.

"Bandar-log," said the voice of Kaa at last, "can ye stir foot or hand
without my order? Speak!"

"Without thy order we cannot stir foot or hand, O Kaa!"

"Good! Come all one pace nearer to me."

The lines of the monkeys swayed forward helplessly, and Baloo and
Bagheera took one stiff step forward with them.

"Nearer!" hissed Kaa, and they all moved again.

Mowgli laid his hands on Baloo and Bagheera to get them away, and the
two great beasts started as though they had been waked from a dream.

"Keep thy hand on my shoulder," Bagheera whispered. "Keep it there, or I
must go back--must go back to Kaa. Aah!"

"It is only old Kaa making circles on the dust," said Mowgli. "Let us
go." And the three slipped off through a gap in the walls to the jungle.

"Whoof!" said Baloo, when he stood under the still trees again. "Never
more will I make an ally of Kaa," and he shook himself all over.

"He knows more than we," said Bagheera, trembling. "In a little time,
had I stayed, I should have walked down his throat."

"Many will walk by that road before the moon rises again," said Baloo.
"He will have good hunting--after his own fashion."

"But what was the meaning of it all?" said Mowgli, who did not know
anything of a python's powers of fascination. "I saw no more than a big
snake making foolish circles till the dark came. And his nose was all
sore. Ho! Ho!"

"Mowgli," said Bagheera angrily, "his nose was sore on thy account, as
my ears and sides and paws, and Baloo's neck and shoulders are bitten
on thy account. Neither Baloo nor Bagheera will be able to hunt with
pleasure for many days."

"It is nothing," said Baloo; "we have the man-cub again."

"True, but he has cost us heavily in time which might have been spent in
good hunting, in wounds, in hair--I am half plucked along my back--and
last of all, in honor. For, remember, Mowgli, I, who am the Black
Panther, was forced to call upon Kaa for protection, and Baloo and I
were both made stupid as little birds by the Hunger Dance. All this,
man-cub, came of thy playing with the Bandar-log."

"True, it is true," said Mowgli sorrowfully. "I am an evil man-cub, and
my stomach is sad in me."

"Mf! What says the Law of the Jungle, Baloo?"

Baloo did not wish to bring Mowgli into any more trouble, but he could
not tamper with the Law, so he mumbled: "Sorrow never stays punishment.
But remember, Bagheera, he is very little."

"I will remember. But he has done mischief, and blows must be dealt now.
Mowgli, hast thou anything to say?"

"Nothing. I did wrong. Baloo and thou are wounded. It is just."

Bagheera gave him half a dozen love-taps from a panther's point of
view (they would hardly have waked one of his own cubs), but for a
seven-year-old boy they amounted to as severe a beating as you could
wish to avoid. When it was all over Mowgli sneezed, and picked himself
up without a word.

"Now," said Bagheera, "jump on my back, Little Brother, and we will go
home."

One of the beauties of Jungle Law is that punishment settles all scores.
There is no nagging afterward.

Mowgli laid his head down on Bagheera's back and slept so deeply that he
never waked when he was put down in the home-cave.




Road-Song of the Bandar-Log

     Here we go in a flung festoon,
     Half-way up to the jealous moon!
     Don't you envy our pranceful bands?
     Don't you wish you had extra hands?
     Wouldn't you like if your tails were--so--
     Curved in the shape of a Cupid's bow?
        Now you're angry, but--never mind,
        Brother, thy tail hangs down behind!

     Here we sit in a branchy row,
     Thinking of beautiful things we know;
     Dreaming of deeds that we mean to do,
     All complete, in a minute or two--
     Something noble and wise and good,
     Done by merely wishing we could.
        We've forgotten, but--never mind,
        Brother, thy tail hangs down behind!

     All the talk we ever have heard
     Uttered by bat or beast or bird--
     Hide or fin or scale or feather--
     Jabber it quickly and all together!
     Excellent!  Wonderful!  Once again!

     Now we are talking just like men!
        Let's pretend we are ... never mind,
        Brother, thy tail hangs down behind!
        This is the way of the Monkey-kind.

     Then join our leaping lines that scumfish through the pines,
     That rocket by where, light and high, the wild grape swings.
     By the rubbish in our wake, and the noble noise we make,
     Be sure, be sure, we're going to do some splendid things!




"Tiger! Tiger!"

     What of the hunting, hunter bold?
        Brother, the watch was long and cold.
     What of the quarry ye went to kill?
        Brother, he crops in the jungle still.
     Where is the power that made your pride?
        Brother, it ebbs from my flank and side.
     Where is the haste that ye hurry by?
        Brother, I go to my lair--to die.

Now we must go back to the first tale. When Mowgli left the wolf's cave
after the fight with the Pack at the Council Rock, he went down to the
plowed lands where the villagers lived, but he would not stop there
because it was too near to the jungle, and he knew that he had made at
least one bad enemy at the Council. So he hurried on, keeping to
the rough road that ran down the valley, and followed it at a steady
jog-trot for nearly twenty miles, till he came to a country that he
did not know. The valley opened out into a great plain dotted over with
rocks and cut up by ravines. At one end stood a little village, and at
the other the thick jungle came down in a sweep to the grazing-grounds,
and stopped there as though it had been cut off with a hoe. All over the
plain, cattle and buffaloes were grazing, and when the little boys in
charge of the herds saw Mowgli they shouted and ran away, and the yellow
pariah dogs that hang about every Indian village barked. Mowgli walked
on, for he was feeling hungry, and when he came to the village gate he
saw the big thorn-bush that was drawn up before the gate at twilight,
pushed to one side.

"Umph!" he said, for he had come across more than one such barricade in
his night rambles after things to eat. "So men are afraid of the People
of the Jungle here also." He sat down by the gate, and when a man came
out he stood up, opened his mouth, and pointed down it to show that
he wanted food. The man stared, and ran back up the one street of the
village shouting for the priest, who was a big, fat man dressed in
white, with a red and yellow mark on his forehead. The priest came to
the gate, and with him at least a hundred people, who stared and talked
and shouted and pointed at Mowgli.

"They have no manners, these Men Folk," said Mowgli to himself. "Only
the gray ape would behave as they do." So he threw back his long hair
and frowned at the crowd.

"What is there to be afraid of?" said the priest. "Look at the marks on
his arms and legs. They are the bites of wolves. He is but a wolf-child
run away from the jungle."

Of course, in playing together, the cubs had often nipped Mowgli harder
than they intended, and there were white scars all over his arms and
legs. But he would have been the last person in the world to call these
bites, for he knew what real biting meant.

"Arre! Arre!" said two or three women together. "To be bitten by wolves,
poor child! He is a handsome boy. He has eyes like red fire. By my
honor, Messua, he is not unlike thy boy that was taken by the tiger."

"Let me look," said a woman with heavy copper rings on her wrists and
ankles, and she peered at Mowgli under the palm of her hand. "Indeed he
is not. He is thinner, but he has the very look of my boy."

The priest was a clever man, and he knew that Messua was wife to the
richest villager in the place. So he looked up at the sky for a minute
and said solemnly: "What the jungle has taken the jungle has restored.
Take the boy into thy house, my sister, and forget not to honor the
priest who sees so far into the lives of men."

"By the Bull that bought me," said Mowgli to himself, "but all this
talking is like another looking-over by the Pack! Well, if I am a man, a
man I must become."

The crowd parted as the woman beckoned Mowgli to her hut, where there
was a red lacquered bedstead, a great earthen grain chest with funny
raised patterns on it, half a dozen copper cooking pots, an image of a
Hindu god in a little alcove, and on the wall a real looking glass, such
as they sell at the country fairs.

She gave him a long drink of milk and some bread, and then she laid her
hand on his head and looked into his eyes; for she thought perhaps that
he might be her real son come back from the jungle where the tiger had
taken him. So she said, "Nathoo, O Nathoo!" Mowgli did not show that he
knew the name. "Dost thou not remember the day when I gave thee thy new
shoes?" She touched his foot, and it was almost as hard as horn. "No,"
she said sorrowfully, "those feet have never worn shoes, but thou art
very like my Nathoo, and thou shalt be my son."

Mowgli was uneasy, because he had never been under a roof before. But as
he looked at the thatch, he saw that he could tear it out any time if he
wanted to get away, and that the window had no fastenings. "What is the
good of a man," he said to himself at last, "if he does not understand
man's talk? Now I am as silly and dumb as a man would be with us in the
jungle. I must speak their talk."

It was not for fun that he had learned while he was with the wolves to
imitate the challenge of bucks in the jungle and the grunt of the little
wild pig. So, as soon as Messua pronounced a word Mowgli would imitate
it almost perfectly, and before dark he had learned the names of many
things in the hut.

There was a difficulty at bedtime, because Mowgli would not sleep under
anything that looked so like a panther trap as that hut, and when they
shut the door he went through the window. "Give him his will," said
Messua's husband. "Remember he can never till now have slept on a bed.
If he is indeed sent in the place of our son he will not run away."

So Mowgli stretched himself in some long, clean grass at the edge of
the field, but before he had closed his eyes a soft gray nose poked him
under the chin.

"Phew!" said Gray Brother (he was the eldest of Mother Wolf's cubs).
"This is a poor reward for following thee twenty miles. Thou smellest
of wood smoke and cattle--altogether like a man already. Wake, Little
Brother; I bring news."

"Are all well in the jungle?" said Mowgli, hugging him.

"All except the wolves that were burned with the Red Flower. Now,
listen. Shere Khan has gone away to hunt far off till his coat grows
again, for he is badly singed. When he returns he swears that he will
lay thy bones in the Waingunga."

"There are two words to that. I also have made a little promise. But
news is always good. I am tired to-night,--very tired with new things,
Gray Brother,--but bring me the news always."

"Thou wilt not forget that thou art a wolf? Men will not make thee
forget?" said Gray Brother anxiously.

"Never. I will always remember that I love thee and all in our cave. But
also I will always remember that I have been cast out of the Pack."

"And that thou mayest be cast out of another pack. Men are only men,
Little Brother, and their talk is like the talk of frogs in a pond. When
I come down here again, I will wait for thee in the bamboos at the edge
of the grazing-ground."

For three months after that night Mowgli hardly ever left the village
gate, he was so busy learning the ways and customs of men. First he had
to wear a cloth round him, which annoyed him horribly; and then he had
to learn about money, which he did not in the least understand, and
about plowing, of which he did not see the use. Then the little children
in the village made him very angry. Luckily, the Law of the Jungle had
taught him to keep his temper, for in the jungle life and food depend on
keeping your temper; but when they made fun of him because he would not
play games or fly kites, or because he mispronounced some word, only the
knowledge that it was unsportsmanlike to kill little naked cubs kept him
from picking them up and breaking them in two.

He did not know his own strength in the least. In the jungle he knew he
was weak compared with the beasts, but in the village people said that
he was as strong as a bull.

And Mowgli had not the faintest idea of the difference that caste makes
between man and man. When the potter's donkey slipped in the clay pit,
Mowgli hauled it out by the tail, and helped to stack the pots for their
journey to the market at Khanhiwara. That was very shocking, too, for
the potter is a low-caste man, and his donkey is worse. When the priest
scolded him, Mowgli threatened to put him on the donkey too, and the
priest told Messua's husband that Mowgli had better be set to work as
soon as possible; and the village head-man told Mowgli that he would
have to go out with the buffaloes next day, and herd them while they
grazed. No one was more pleased than Mowgli; and that night, because he
had been appointed a servant of the village, as it were, he went off
to a circle that met every evening on a masonry platform under a great
fig-tree. It was the village club, and the head-man and the watchman and
the barber, who knew all the gossip of the village, and old Buldeo, the
village hunter, who had a Tower musket, met and smoked. The monkeys
sat and talked in the upper branches, and there was a hole under the
platform where a cobra lived, and he had his little platter of milk
every night because he was sacred; and the old men sat around the tree
and talked, and pulled at the big huqas (the water-pipes) till far into
the night. They told wonderful tales of gods and men and ghosts; and
Buldeo told even more wonderful ones of the ways of beasts in the
jungle, till the eyes of the children sitting outside the circle bulged
out of their heads. Most of the tales were about animals, for the jungle
was always at their door. The deer and the wild pig grubbed up their
crops, and now and again the tiger carried off a man at twilight, within
sight of the village gates.

Mowgli, who naturally knew something about what they were talking of,
had to cover his face not to show that he was laughing, while Buldeo,
the Tower musket across his knees, climbed on from one wonderful story
to another, and Mowgli's shoulders shook.

Buldeo was explaining how the tiger that had carried away Messua's son
was a ghost-tiger, and his body was inhabited by the ghost of a wicked,
old money-lender, who had died some years ago. "And I know that this is
true," he said, "because Purun Dass always limped from the blow that he
got in a riot when his account books were burned, and the tiger that I
speak of he limps, too, for the tracks of his pads are unequal."

"True, true, that must be the truth," said the gray-beards, nodding
together.

"Are all these tales such cobwebs and moon talk?" said Mowgli. "That
tiger limps because he was born lame, as everyone knows. To talk of the
soul of a money-lender in a beast that never had the courage of a jackal
is child's talk."

Buldeo was speechless with surprise for a moment, and the head-man
stared.

"Oho! It is the jungle brat, is it?" said Buldeo. "If thou art so
wise, better bring his hide to Khanhiwara, for the Government has set
a hundred rupees on his life. Better still, talk not when thy elders
speak."

Mowgli rose to go. "All the evening I have lain here listening," he
called back over his shoulder, "and, except once or twice, Buldeo has
not said one word of truth concerning the jungle, which is at his very
doors. How, then, shall I believe the tales of ghosts and gods and
goblins which he says he has seen?"

"It is full time that boy went to herding," said the head-man, while
Buldeo puffed and snorted at Mowgli's impertinence.

The custom of most Indian villages is for a few boys to take the cattle
and buffaloes out to graze in the early morning, and bring them back
at night. The very cattle that would trample a white man to death allow
themselves to be banged and bullied and shouted at by children that
hardly come up to their noses. So long as the boys keep with the herds
they are safe, for not even the tiger will charge a mob of cattle. But
if they straggle to pick flowers or hunt lizards, they are sometimes
carried off. Mowgli went through the village street in the dawn, sitting
on the back of Rama, the great herd bull. The slaty-blue buffaloes,
with their long, backward-sweeping horns and savage eyes, rose out their
byres, one by one, and followed him, and Mowgli made it very clear to
the children with him that he was the master. He beat the buffaloes with
a long, polished bamboo, and told Kamya, one of the boys, to graze the
cattle by themselves, while he went on with the buffaloes, and to be
very careful not to stray away from the herd.

An Indian grazing ground is all rocks and scrub and tussocks and little
ravines, among which the herds scatter and disappear. The buffaloes
generally keep to the pools and muddy places, where they lie wallowing
or basking in the warm mud for hours. Mowgli drove them on to the edge
of the plain where the Waingunga came out of the jungle; then he dropped
from Rama's neck, trotted off to a bamboo clump, and found Gray Brother.
"Ah," said Gray Brother, "I have waited here very many days. What is the
meaning of this cattle-herding work?"

"It is an order," said Mowgli. "I am a village herd for a while. What
news of Shere Khan?"

"He has come back to this country, and has waited here a long time for
thee. Now he has gone off again, for the game is scarce. But he means to
kill thee."

"Very good," said Mowgli. "So long as he is away do thou or one of the
four brothers sit on that rock, so that I can see thee as I come out of
the village. When he comes back wait for me in the ravine by the dhak
tree in the center of the plain. We need not walk into Shere Khan's
mouth."

Then Mowgli picked out a shady place, and lay down and slept while
the buffaloes grazed round him. Herding in India is one of the laziest
things in the world. The cattle move and crunch, and lie down, and move
on again, and they do not even low. They only grunt, and the buffaloes
very seldom say anything, but get down into the muddy pools one after
another, and work their way into the mud till only their noses and
staring china-blue eyes show above the surface, and then they lie like
logs. The sun makes the rocks dance in the heat, and the herd children
hear one kite (never any more) whistling almost out of sight overhead,
and they know that if they died, or a cow died, that kite would sweep
down, and the next kite miles away would see him drop and follow, and
the next, and the next, and almost before they were dead there would be
a score of hungry kites come out of nowhere. Then they sleep and
wake and sleep again, and weave little baskets of dried grass and put
grasshoppers in them; or catch two praying mantises and make them fight;
or string a necklace of red and black jungle nuts; or watch a lizard
basking on a rock, or a snake hunting a frog near the wallows. Then they
sing long, long songs with odd native quavers at the end of them, and
the day seems longer than most people's whole lives, and perhaps they
make a mud castle with mud figures of men and horses and buffaloes, and
put reeds into the men's hands, and pretend that they are kings and the
figures are their armies, or that they are gods to be worshiped. Then
evening comes and the children call, and the buffaloes lumber up out of
the sticky mud with noises like gunshots going off one after the other,
and they all string across the gray plain back to the twinkling village
lights.

Day after day Mowgli would lead the buffaloes out to their wallows, and
day after day he would see Gray Brother's back a mile and a half away
across the plain (so he knew that Shere Khan had not come back), and day
after day he would lie on the grass listening to the noises round him,
and dreaming of old days in the jungle. If Shere Khan had made a false
step with his lame paw up in the jungles by the Waingunga, Mowgli would
have heard him in those long, still mornings.

At last a day came when he did not see Gray Brother at the signal place,
and he laughed and headed the buffaloes for the ravine by the dhk tree,
which was all covered with golden-red flowers. There sat Gray Brother,
every bristle on his back lifted.

"He has hidden for a month to throw thee off thy guard. He crossed the
ranges last night with Tabaqui, hot-foot on thy trail," said the Wolf,
panting.

Mowgli frowned. "I am not afraid of Shere Khan, but Tabaqui is very
cunning."

"Have no fear," said Gray Brother, licking his lips a little. "I met
Tabaqui in the dawn. Now he is telling all his wisdom to the kites, but
he told me everything before I broke his back. Shere Khan's plan is to
wait for thee at the village gate this evening--for thee and for no one
else. He is lying up now, in the big dry ravine of the Waingunga."

"Has he eaten today, or does he hunt empty?" said Mowgli, for the answer
meant life and death to him.

"He killed at dawn,--a pig,--and he has drunk too. Remember, Shere Khan
could never fast, even for the sake of revenge."

"Oh! Fool, fool! What a cub's cub it is! Eaten and drunk too, and he
thinks that I shall wait till he has slept! Now, where does he lie up?
If there were but ten of us we might pull him down as he lies. These
buffaloes will not charge unless they wind him, and I cannot speak their
language. Can we get behind his track so that they may smell it?"

"He swam far down the Waingunga to cut that off," said Gray Brother.

"Tabaqui told him that, I know. He would never have thought of it
alone." Mowgli stood with his finger in his mouth, thinking. "The big
ravine of the Waingunga. That opens out on the plain not half a mile
from here. I can take the herd round through the jungle to the head of
the ravine and then sweep down--but he would slink out at the foot. We
must block that end. Gray Brother, canst thou cut the herd in two for
me?"

"Not I, perhaps--but I have brought a wise helper." Gray Brother trotted
off and dropped into a hole. Then there lifted up a huge gray head that
Mowgli knew well, and the hot air was filled with the most desolate cry
of all the jungle--the hunting howl of a wolf at midday.

"Akela! Akela!" said Mowgli, clapping his hands. "I might have known
that thou wouldst not forget me. We have a big work in hand. Cut the
herd in two, Akela. Keep the cows and calves together, and the bulls and
the plow buffaloes by themselves."

The two wolves ran, ladies'-chain fashion, in and out of the herd, which
snorted and threw up its head, and separated into two clumps. In one,
the cow-buffaloes stood with their calves in the center, and glared
and pawed, ready, if a wolf would only stay still, to charge down and
trample the life out of him. In the other, the bulls and the young bulls
snorted and stamped, but though they looked more imposing they were much
less dangerous, for they had no calves to protect. No six men could have
divided the herd so neatly.

"What orders!" panted Akela. "They are trying to join again."

Mowgli slipped on to Rama's back. "Drive the bulls away to the left,
Akela. Gray Brother, when we are gone, hold the cows together, and drive
them into the foot of the ravine."

"How far?" said Gray Brother, panting and snapping.

"Till the sides are higher than Shere Khan can jump," shouted Mowgli.
"Keep them there till we come down." The bulls swept off as Akela bayed,
and Gray Brother stopped in front of the cows. They charged down on him,
and he ran just before them to the foot of the ravine, as Akela drove
the bulls far to the left.

"Well done! Another charge and they are fairly started. Careful,
now--careful, Akela. A snap too much and the bulls will charge. Hujah!
This is wilder work than driving black-buck. Didst thou think these
creatures could move so swiftly?" Mowgli called.

"I have--have hunted these too in my time," gasped Akela in the dust.
"Shall I turn them into the jungle?"

"Ay! Turn. Swiftly turn them! Rama is mad with rage. Oh, if I could only
tell him what I need of him to-day."

The bulls were turned, to the right this time, and crashed into the
standing thicket. The other herd children, watching with the cattle half
a mile away, hurried to the village as fast as their legs could carry
them, crying that the buffaloes had gone mad and run away.

But Mowgli's plan was simple enough. All he wanted to do was to make a
big circle uphill and get at the head of the ravine, and then take the
bulls down it and catch Shere Khan between the bulls and the cows; for
he knew that after a meal and a full drink Shere Khan would not be in
any condition to fight or to clamber up the sides of the ravine. He was
soothing the buffaloes now by voice, and Akela had dropped far to the
rear, only whimpering once or twice to hurry the rear-guard. It was a
long, long circle, for they did not wish to get too near the ravine and
give Shere Khan warning. At last Mowgli rounded up the bewildered herd
at the head of the ravine on a grassy patch that sloped steeply down to
the ravine itself. From that height you could see across the tops of the
trees down to the plain below; but what Mowgli looked at was the sides
of the ravine, and he saw with a great deal of satisfaction that they
ran nearly straight up and down, while the vines and creepers that hung
over them would give no foothold to a tiger who wanted to get out.

"Let them breathe, Akela," he said, holding up his hand. "They have not
winded him yet. Let them breathe. I must tell Shere Khan who comes. We
have him in the trap."

He put his hands to his mouth and shouted down the ravine--it was almost
like shouting down a tunnel--and the echoes jumped from rock to rock.

After a long time there came back the drawling, sleepy snarl of a
full-fed tiger just wakened.

"Who calls?" said Shere Khan, and a splendid peacock fluttered up out of
the ravine screeching.

"I, Mowgli. Cattle thief, it is time to come to the Council Rock!
Down--hurry them down, Akela! Down, Rama, down!"

The herd paused for an instant at the edge of the slope, but Akela gave
tongue in the full hunting-yell, and they pitched over one after the
other, just as steamers shoot rapids, the sand and stones spurting up
round them. Once started, there was no chance of stopping, and before
they were fairly in the bed of the ravine Rama winded Shere Khan and
bellowed.

"Ha! Ha!" said Mowgli, on his back. "Now thou knowest!" and the torrent
of black horns, foaming muzzles, and staring eyes whirled down the
ravine just as boulders go down in floodtime; the weaker buffaloes being
shouldered out to the sides of the ravine where they tore through the
creepers. They knew what the business was before them--the terrible
charge of the buffalo herd against which no tiger can hope to stand.
Shere Khan heard the thunder of their hoofs, picked himself up, and
lumbered down the ravine, looking from side to side for some way of
escape, but the walls of the ravine were straight and he had to hold on,
heavy with his dinner and his drink, willing to do anything rather than
fight. The herd splashed through the pool he had just left, bellowing
till the narrow cut rang. Mowgli heard an answering bellow from the foot
of the ravine, saw Shere Khan turn (the tiger knew if the worst came
to the worst it was better to meet the bulls than the cows with their
calves), and then Rama tripped, stumbled, and went on again over
something soft, and, with the bulls at his heels, crashed full into the
other herd, while the weaker buffaloes were lifted clean off their feet
by the shock of the meeting. That charge carried both herds out into the
plain, goring and stamping and snorting. Mowgli watched his time, and
slipped off Rama's neck, laying about him right and left with his stick.

"Quick, Akela! Break them up. Scatter them, or they will be fighting one
another. Drive them away, Akela. Hai, Rama! Hai, hai, hai! my children.
Softly now, softly! It is all over."

Akela and Gray Brother ran to and fro nipping the buffaloes' legs,
and though the herd wheeled once to charge up the ravine again, Mowgli
managed to turn Rama, and the others followed him to the wallows.

Shere Khan needed no more trampling. He was dead, and the kites were
coming for him already.

"Brothers, that was a dog's death," said Mowgli, feeling for the knife
he always carried in a sheath round his neck now that he lived with men.
"But he would never have shown fight. His hide will look well on the
Council Rock. We must get to work swiftly."

A boy trained among men would never have dreamed of skinning a ten-foot
tiger alone, but Mowgli knew better than anyone else how an animal's
skin is fitted on, and how it can be taken off. But it was hard work,
and Mowgli slashed and tore and grunted for an hour, while the wolves
lolled out their tongues, or came forward and tugged as he ordered them.
Presently a hand fell on his shoulder, and looking up he saw Buldeo with
the Tower musket. The children had told the village about the buffalo
stampede, and Buldeo went out angrily, only too anxious to correct
Mowgli for not taking better care of the herd. The wolves dropped out of
sight as soon as they saw the man coming.

"What is this folly?" said Buldeo angrily. "To think that thou canst
skin a tiger! Where did the buffaloes kill him? It is the Lame Tiger
too, and there is a hundred rupees on his head. Well, well, we will
overlook thy letting the herd run off, and perhaps I will give thee one
of the rupees of the reward when I have taken the skin to Khanhiwara."
He fumbled in his waist cloth for flint and steel, and stooped down to
singe Shere Khan's whiskers. Most native hunters always singe a tiger's
whiskers to prevent his ghost from haunting them.

"Hum!" said Mowgli, half to himself as he ripped back the skin of a
forepaw. "So thou wilt take the hide to Khanhiwara for the reward, and
perhaps give me one rupee? Now it is in my mind that I need the skin for
my own use. Heh! Old man, take away that fire!"

"What talk is this to the chief hunter of the village? Thy luck and the
stupidity of thy buffaloes have helped thee to this kill. The tiger has
just fed, or he would have gone twenty miles by this time. Thou canst
not even skin him properly, little beggar brat, and forsooth I, Buldeo,
must be told not to singe his whiskers. Mowgli, I will not give thee one
anna of the reward, but only a very big beating. Leave the carcass!"

"By the Bull that bought me," said Mowgli, who was trying to get at the
shoulder, "must I stay babbling to an old ape all noon? Here, Akela,
this man plagues me."

Buldeo, who was still stooping over Shere Khan's head, found himself
sprawling on the grass, with a gray wolf standing over him, while Mowgli
went on skinning as though he were alone in all India.

"Ye-es," he said, between his teeth. "Thou art altogether right, Buldeo.
Thou wilt never give me one anna of the reward. There is an old war
between this lame tiger and myself--a very old war, and--I have won."

To do Buldeo justice, if he had been ten years younger he would have
taken his chance with Akela had he met the wolf in the woods, but a wolf
who obeyed the orders of this boy who had private wars with man-eating
tigers was not a common animal. It was sorcery, magic of the worst kind,
thought Buldeo, and he wondered whether the amulet round his neck would
protect him. He lay as still as still, expecting every minute to see
Mowgli turn into a tiger too.

"Maharaj! Great King," he said at last in a husky whisper.

"Yes," said Mowgli, without turning his head, chuckling a little.

"I am an old man. I did not know that thou wast anything more than a
herdsboy. May I rise up and go away, or will thy servant tear me to
pieces?"

"Go, and peace go with thee. Only, another time do not meddle with my
game. Let him go, Akela."

Buldeo hobbled away to the village as fast as he could, looking back
over his shoulder in case Mowgli should change into something terrible.
When he got to the village he told a tale of magic and enchantment and
sorcery that made the priest look very grave.

Mowgli went on with his work, but it was nearly twilight before he and
the wolves had drawn the great gay skin clear of the body.

"Now we must hide this and take the buffaloes home! Help me to herd
them, Akela."

The herd rounded up in the misty twilight, and when they got near the
village Mowgli saw lights, and heard the conches and bells in the temple
blowing and banging. Half the village seemed to be waiting for him
by the gate. "That is because I have killed Shere Khan," he said
to himself. But a shower of stones whistled about his ears, and the
villagers shouted: "Sorcerer! Wolf's brat! Jungle demon! Go away! Get
hence quickly or the priest will turn thee into a wolf again. Shoot,
Buldeo, shoot!"

The old Tower musket went off with a bang, and a young buffalo bellowed
in pain.

"More sorcery!" shouted the villagers. "He can turn bullets. Buldeo,
that was thy buffalo."

"Now what is this?" said Mowgli, bewildered, as the stones flew thicker.

"They are not unlike the Pack, these brothers of thine," said Akela,
sitting down composedly. "It is in my head that, if bullets mean
anything, they would cast thee out."

"Wolf! Wolf's cub! Go away!" shouted the priest, waving a sprig of the
sacred tulsi plant.

"Again? Last time it was because I was a man. This time it is because I
am a wolf. Let us go, Akela."

A woman--it was Messua--ran across to the herd, and cried: "Oh, my son,
my son! They say thou art a sorcerer who can turn himself into a beast
at will. I do not believe, but go away or they will kill thee. Buldeo
says thou art a wizard, but I know thou hast avenged Nathoo's death."

"Come back, Messua!" shouted the crowd. "Come back, or we will stone
thee."

Mowgli laughed a little short ugly laugh, for a stone had hit him in
the mouth. "Run back, Messua. This is one of the foolish tales they tell
under the big tree at dusk. I have at least paid for thy son's life.
Farewell; and run quickly, for I shall send the herd in more swiftly
than their brickbats. I am no wizard, Messua. Farewell!"

"Now, once more, Akela," he cried. "Bring the herd in."

The buffaloes were anxious enough to get to the village. They hardly
needed Akela's yell, but charged through the gate like a whirlwind,
scattering the crowd right and left.

"Keep count!" shouted Mowgli scornfully. "It may be that I have stolen
one of them. Keep count, for I will do your herding no more. Fare you
well, children of men, and thank Messua that I do not come in with my
wolves and hunt you up and down your street."

He turned on his heel and walked away with the Lone Wolf, and as he
looked up at the stars he felt happy. "No more sleeping in traps for me,
Akela. Let us get Shere Khan's skin and go away. No, we will not hurt
the village, for Messua was kind to me."

When the moon rose over the plain, making it look all milky, the
horrified villagers saw Mowgli, with two wolves at his heels and a
bundle on his head, trotting across at the steady wolf's trot that eats
up the long miles like fire. Then they banged the temple bells and blew
the conches louder than ever. And Messua cried, and Buldeo embroidered
the story of his adventures in the jungle, till he ended by saying that
Akela stood up on his hind legs and talked like a man.

The moon was just going down when Mowgli and the two wolves came to the
hill of the Council Rock, and they stopped at Mother Wolf's cave.

"They have cast me out from the Man-Pack, Mother," shouted Mowgli, "but
I come with the hide of Shere Khan to keep my word."

Mother Wolf walked stiffly from the cave with the cubs behind her, and
her eyes glowed as she saw the skin.

"I told him on that day, when he crammed his head and shoulders into
this cave, hunting for thy life, Little Frog--I told him that the hunter
would be the hunted. It is well done."

"Little Brother, it is well done," said a deep voice in the thicket.
"We were lonely in the jungle without thee, and Bagheera came running
to Mowgli's bare feet. They clambered up the Council Rock together, and
Mowgli spread the skin out on the flat stone where Akela used to sit,
and pegged it down with four slivers of bamboo, and Akela lay down upon
it, and called the old call to the Council, 'Look--look well, O Wolves,'
exactly as he had called when Mowgli was first brought there."

Ever since Akela had been deposed, the Pack had been without a leader,
hunting and fighting at their own pleasure. But they answered the call
from habit; and some of them were lame from the traps they had fallen
into, and some limped from shot wounds, and some were mangy from eating
bad food, and many were missing. But they came to the Council Rock, all
that were left of them, and saw Shere Khan's striped hide on the rock,
and the huge claws dangling at the end of the empty dangling feet. It
was then that Mowgli made up a song that came up into his throat all
by itself, and he shouted it aloud, leaping up and down on the rattling
skin, and beating time with his heels till he had no more breath left,
while Gray Brother and Akela howled between the verses.

"Look well, O Wolves. Have I kept my word?" said Mowgli. And the wolves
bayed "Yes," and one tattered wolf howled:

"Lead us again, O Akela. Lead us again, O Man-cub, for we be sick of
this lawlessness, and we would be the Free People once more."

"Nay," purred Bagheera, "that may not be. When ye are full-fed, the
madness may come upon you again. Not for nothing are ye called the Free
People. Ye fought for freedom, and it is yours. Eat it, O Wolves."

"Man-Pack and Wolf-Pack have cast me out," said Mowgli. "Now I will hunt
alone in the jungle."

"And we will hunt with thee," said the four cubs.

So Mowgli went away and hunted with the four cubs in the jungle from
that day on. But he was not always alone, because, years afterward, he
became a man and married.

But that is a story for grown-ups.




Mowgli's Song

     THAT HE SANG AT THE COUNCIL ROCK WHEN HE
     DANCED ON SHERE KHAN'S HIDE

     The Song of Mowgli--I, Mowgli, am singing.  Let the jungle
        listen to the things I have done.

     Shere Khan said he would kill--would kill!  At the gates in the
        twilight he would kill Mowgli, the Frog!

     He ate and he drank.  Drink deep, Shere Khan, for when wilt thou
        drink again?  Sleep and dream of the kill.

     I am alone on the grazing-grounds.  Gray Brother, come to me!
        Come to me, Lone Wolf, for there is big game afoot!

     Bring up the great bull buffaloes, the blue-skinned herd bulls
        with the angry eyes.  Drive them to and fro as I order.

     Sleepest thou still, Shere Khan?  Wake, oh, wake!  Here come I,
        and the bulls are behind.

     Rama, the King of the Buffaloes, stamped with his foot.  Waters of
        the Waingunga, whither went Shere Khan?

     He is not Ikki to dig holes, nor Mao, the Peacock, that he should
        fly.  He is not Mang the Bat, to hang in the branches.  Little
        bamboos that creak together, tell me where he ran?

     Ow!  He is there.  Ahoo!  He is there.  Under the feet of Rama
        lies the Lame One!  Up, Shere Khan!

     Up and kill!  Here is meat; break the necks of the bulls!

     Hsh!  He is asleep.  We will not wake him, for his strength is
        very great.  The kites have come down to see it.  The black
        ants have come up to know it.  There is a great assembly in his
        honor.

     Alala!  I have no cloth to wrap me.  The kites will see that I am
        naked.  I am ashamed to meet all these people.

     Lend me thy coat, Shere Khan.  Lend me thy gay striped coat that I
        may go to the Council Rock.

     By the Bull that bought me I made a promise--a little promise.
        Only thy coat is lacking before I keep my word.

     With the knife, with the knife that men use, with the knife of the
        hunter, I will stoop down for my gift.

     Waters of the Waingunga, Shere Khan gives me his coat for the love
        that he bears me.  Pull, Gray Brother!  Pull, Akela!  Heavy is
        the hide of Shere Khan.

     The Man Pack are angry.  They throw stones and talk child's talk.
        My mouth is bleeding.  Let me run away.

     Through the night, through the hot night, run swiftly with me, my
        brothers.  We will leave the lights of the village and go to
        the low moon.

     Waters of the Waingunga, the Man-Pack have cast me out.  I did
        them no harm, but they were afraid of me.  Why?

     Wolf Pack, ye have cast me out too.  The jungle is shut to me and
        the village gates are shut.  Why?

     As Mang flies between the beasts and birds, so fly I between the
        village and the jungle.  Why?

     I dance on the hide of Shere Khan, but my heart is very heavy.  My
        mouth is cut and wounded with the stones from the village, but
        my heart is very light, because I have come back to the jungle.
        Why?

     These two things fight together in me as the snakes fight in the
        spring.  The water comes out of my eyes; yet I laugh while it
        falls.  Why?

     I am two Mowglis, but the hide of Shere Khan is under my feet.

     All the jungle knows that I have killed Shere Khan.  Look--look
        well, O Wolves!

     Ahae!  My heart is heavy with the things that I do not understand.




The White Seal

     Oh! hush thee, my baby, the night is behind us,
        And black are the waters that sparkled so green.
     The moon, o'er the combers, looks downward to find us
        At rest in the hollows that rustle between.
     Where billow meets billow, then soft be thy pillow,
        Ah, weary wee flipperling, curl at thy ease!
     The storm shall not wake thee, nor shark overtake thee,
        Asleep in the arms of the slow-swinging seas!

                                              Seal Lullaby


All these things happened several years ago at a place called
Novastoshnah, or North East Point, on the Island of St. Paul, away and
away in the Bering Sea. Limmershin, the Winter Wren, told me the tale
when he was blown on to the rigging of a steamer going to Japan, and I
took him down into my cabin and warmed and fed him for a couple of days
till he was fit to fly back to St. Paul's again. Limmershin is a very
quaint little bird, but he knows how to tell the truth.

Nobody comes to Novastoshnah except on business, and the only people
who have regular business there are the seals. They come in the summer
months by hundreds and hundreds of thousands out of the cold gray sea.
For Novastoshnah Beach has the finest accommodation for seals of any
place in all the world.

Sea Catch knew that, and every spring would swim from whatever place
he happened to be in--would swim like a torpedo-boat straight for
Novastoshnah and spend a month fighting with his companions for a good
place on the rocks, as close to the sea as possible. Sea Catch was
fifteen years old, a huge gray fur seal with almost a mane on his
shoulders, and long, wicked dog teeth. When he heaved himself up on his
front flippers he stood more than four feet clear of the ground, and his
weight, if anyone had been bold enough to weigh him, was nearly seven
hundred pounds. He was scarred all over with the marks of savage fights,
but he was always ready for just one fight more. He would put his head
on one side, as though he were afraid to look his enemy in the face;
then he would shoot it out like lightning, and when the big teeth were
firmly fixed on the other seal's neck, the other seal might get away if
he could, but Sea Catch would not help him.

Yet Sea Catch never chased a beaten seal, for that was against the Rules
of the Beach. He only wanted room by the sea for his nursery. But as
there were forty or fifty thousand other seals hunting for the same
thing each spring, the whistling, bellowing, roaring, and blowing on the
beach was something frightful.

From a little hill called Hutchinson's Hill, you could look over three
and a half miles of ground covered with fighting seals; and the surf was
dotted all over with the heads of seals hurrying to land and begin their
share of the fighting. They fought in the breakers, they fought in the
sand, and they fought on the smooth-worn basalt rocks of the nurseries,
for they were just as stupid and unaccommodating as men. Their wives
never came to the island until late in May or early in June, for they
did not care to be torn to pieces; and the young two-, three-, and
four-year-old seals who had not begun housekeeping went inland about
half a mile through the ranks of the fighters and played about on the
sand dunes in droves and legions, and rubbed off every single green
thing that grew. They were called the holluschickie--the bachelors--and
there were perhaps two or three hundred thousand of them at Novastoshnah
alone.

Sea Catch had just finished his forty-fifth fight one spring when
Matkah, his soft, sleek, gentle-eyed wife, came up out of the sea,
and he caught her by the scruff of the neck and dumped her down on his
reservation, saying gruffly: "Late as usual. Where have you been?"

It was not the fashion for Sea Catch to eat anything during the four
months he stayed on the beaches, and so his temper was generally bad.
Matkah knew better than to answer back. She looked round and cooed: "How
thoughtful of you. You've taken the old place again."

"I should think I had," said Sea Catch. "Look at me!"

He was scratched and bleeding in twenty places; one eye was almost out,
and his sides were torn to ribbons.

"Oh, you men, you men!" Matkah said, fanning herself with her hind
flipper. "Why can't you be sensible and settle your places quietly? You
look as though you had been fighting with the Killer Whale."

"I haven't been doing anything but fight since the middle of May. The
beach is disgracefully crowded this season. I've met at least a hundred
seals from Lukannon Beach, house hunting. Why can't people stay where
they belong?"

"I've often thought we should be much happier if we hauled out at Otter
Island instead of this crowded place," said Matkah.

"Bah! Only the holluschickie go to Otter Island. If we went there they
would say we were afraid. We must preserve appearances, my dear."

Sea Catch sunk his head proudly between his fat shoulders and pretended
to go to sleep for a few minutes, but all the time he was keeping a
sharp lookout for a fight. Now that all the seals and their wives were
on the land, you could hear their clamor miles out to sea above the
loudest gales. At the lowest counting there were over a million seals
on the beach--old seals, mother seals, tiny babies, and holluschickie,
fighting, scuffling, bleating, crawling, and playing together--going
down to the sea and coming up from it in gangs and regiments, lying
over every foot of ground as far as the eye could reach, and skirmishing
about in brigades through the fog. It is nearly always foggy at
Novastoshnah, except when the sun comes out and makes everything look
all pearly and rainbow-colored for a little while.

Kotick, Matkah's baby, was born in the middle of that confusion, and he
was all head and shoulders, with pale, watery blue eyes, as tiny seals
must be, but there was something about his coat that made his mother
look at him very closely.

"Sea Catch," she said, at last, "our baby's going to be white!"

"Empty clam-shells and dry seaweed!" snorted Sea Catch. "There never has
been such a thing in the world as a white seal."

"I can't help that," said Matkah; "there's going to be now." And she
sang the low, crooning seal song that all the mother seals sing to their
babies:

     You mustn't swim till you're six weeks old,
        Or your head will be sunk by your heels;
     And summer gales and Killer Whales
        Are bad for baby seals.

     Are bad for baby seals, dear rat,
        As bad as bad can be;
     But splash and grow strong,
     And you can't be wrong.
        Child of the Open Sea!

Of course the little fellow did not understand the words at first. He
paddled and scrambled about by his mother's side, and learned to scuffle
out of the way when his father was fighting with another seal, and the
two rolled and roared up and down the slippery rocks. Matkah used to go
to sea to get things to eat, and the baby was fed only once in two days,
but then he ate all he could and throve upon it.

The first thing he did was to crawl inland, and there he met tens
of thousands of babies of his own age, and they played together like
puppies, went to sleep on the clean sand, and played again. The old
people in the nurseries took no notice of them, and the holluschickie
kept to their own grounds, and the babies had a beautiful playtime.

When Matkah came back from her deep-sea fishing she would go straight
to their playground and call as a sheep calls for a lamb, and wait until
she heard Kotick bleat. Then she would take the straightest of straight
lines in his direction, striking out with her fore flippers and knocking
the youngsters head over heels right and left. There were always a few
hundred mothers hunting for their children through the playgrounds, and
the babies were kept lively. But, as Matkah told Kotick, "So long as you
don't lie in muddy water and get mange, or rub the hard sand into a cut
or scratch, and so long as you never go swimming when there is a heavy
sea, nothing will hurt you here."

Little seals can no more swim than little children, but they are unhappy
till they learn. The first time that Kotick went down to the sea a wave
carried him out beyond his depth, and his big head sank and his little
hind flippers flew up exactly as his mother had told him in the song,
and if the next wave had not thrown him back again he would have
drowned.

After that, he learned to lie in a beach pool and let the wash of the
waves just cover him and lift him up while he paddled, but he always
kept his eye open for big waves that might hurt. He was two weeks
learning to use his flippers; and all that while he floundered in and
out of the water, and coughed and grunted and crawled up the beach and
took catnaps on the sand, and went back again, until at last he found
that he truly belonged to the water.

Then you can imagine the times that he had with his companions, ducking
under the rollers; or coming in on top of a comber and landing with a
swash and a splutter as the big wave went whirling far up the beach; or
standing up on his tail and scratching his head as the old people did;
or playing "I'm the King of the Castle" on slippery, weedy rocks that
just stuck out of the wash. Now and then he would see a thin fin, like
a big shark's fin, drifting along close to shore, and he knew that that
was the Killer Whale, the Grampus, who eats young seals when he can get
them; and Kotick would head for the beach like an arrow, and the fin
would jig off slowly, as if it were looking for nothing at all.

Late in October the seals began to leave St. Paul's for the deep sea, by
families and tribes, and there was no more fighting over the nurseries,
and the holluschickie played anywhere they liked. "Next year," said
Matkah to Kotick, "you will be a holluschickie; but this year you must
learn how to catch fish."

They set out together across the Pacific, and Matkah showed Kotick how
to sleep on his back with his flippers tucked down by his side and his
little nose just out of the water. No cradle is so comfortable as the
long, rocking swell of the Pacific. When Kotick felt his skin tingle all
over, Matkah told him he was learning the "feel of the water," and that
tingly, prickly feelings meant bad weather coming, and he must swim hard
and get away.

"In a little time," she said, "you'll know where to swim to, but just
now we'll follow Sea Pig, the Porpoise, for he is very wise." A school
of porpoises were ducking and tearing through the water, and little
Kotick followed them as fast as he could. "How do you know where to go
to?" he panted. The leader of the school rolled his white eye and ducked
under. "My tail tingles, youngster," he said. "That means there's a gale
behind me. Come along! When you're south of the Sticky Water [he meant
the Equator] and your tail tingles, that means there's a gale in front
of you and you must head north. Come along! The water feels bad here."

This was one of very many things that Kotick learned, and he was always
learning. Matkah taught him to follow the cod and the halibut along the
under-sea banks and wrench the rockling out of his hole among the weeds;
how to skirt the wrecks lying a hundred fathoms below water and dart
like a rifle bullet in at one porthole and out at another as the fishes
ran; how to dance on the top of the waves when the lightning was racing
all over the sky, and wave his flipper politely to the stumpy-tailed
Albatross and the Man-of-war Hawk as they went down the wind; how to
jump three or four feet clear of the water like a dolphin, flippers
close to the side and tail curved; to leave the flying fish alone
because they are all bony; to take the shoulder-piece out of a cod at
full speed ten fathoms deep, and never to stop and look at a boat or a
ship, but particularly a row-boat. At the end of six months what Kotick
did not know about deep-sea fishing was not worth the knowing. And all
that time he never set flipper on dry ground.

One day, however, as he was lying half asleep in the warm water
somewhere off the Island of Juan Fernandez, he felt faint and lazy all
over, just as human people do when the spring is in their legs, and he
remembered the good firm beaches of Novastoshnah seven thousand miles
away, the games his companions played, the smell of the seaweed, the
seal roar, and the fighting. That very minute he turned north, swimming
steadily, and as he went on he met scores of his mates, all bound for
the same place, and they said: "Greeting, Kotick! This year we are
all holluschickie, and we can dance the Fire-dance in the breakers off
Lukannon and play on the new grass. But where did you get that coat?"

Kotick's fur was almost pure white now, and though he felt very proud of
it, he only said, "Swim quickly! My bones are aching for the land." And
so they all came to the beaches where they had been born, and heard the
old seals, their fathers, fighting in the rolling mist.

That night Kotick danced the Fire-dance with the yearling seals. The sea
is full of fire on summer nights all the way down from Novastoshnah to
Lukannon, and each seal leaves a wake like burning oil behind him and a
flaming flash when he jumps, and the waves break in great phosphorescent
streaks and swirls. Then they went inland to the holluschickie grounds
and rolled up and down in the new wild wheat and told stories of what
they had done while they had been at sea. They talked about the Pacific
as boys would talk about a wood that they had been nutting in, and if
anyone had understood them he could have gone away and made such a chart
of that ocean as never was. The three- and four-year-old holluschickie
romped down from Hutchinson's Hill crying: "Out of the way, youngsters!
The sea is deep and you don't know all that's in it yet. Wait till
you've rounded the Horn. Hi, you yearling, where did you get that white
coat?"

"I didn't get it," said Kotick. "It grew." And just as he was going to
roll the speaker over, a couple of black-haired men with flat red faces
came from behind a sand dune, and Kotick, who had never seen a man
before, coughed and lowered his head. The holluschickie just bundled off
a few yards and sat staring stupidly. The men were no less than Kerick
Booterin, the chief of the seal-hunters on the island, and Patalamon,
his son. They came from the little village not half a mile from the sea
nurseries, and they were deciding what seals they would drive up to the
killing pens--for the seals were driven just like sheep--to be turned
into seal-skin jackets later on.

"Ho!" said Patalamon. "Look! There's a white seal!"

Kerick Booterin turned nearly white under his oil and smoke, for he was
an Aleut, and Aleuts are not clean people. Then he began to mutter a
prayer. "Don't touch him, Patalamon. There has never been a white seal
since--since I was born. Perhaps it is old Zaharrof's ghost. He was lost
last year in the big gale."

"I'm not going near him," said Patalamon. "He's unlucky. Do you really
think he is old Zaharrof come back? I owe him for some gulls' eggs."

"Don't look at him," said Kerick. "Head off that drove of
four-year-olds. The men ought to skin two hundred to-day, but it's the
beginning of the season and they are new to the work. A hundred will do.
Quick!"

Patalamon rattled a pair of seal's shoulder bones in front of a herd
of holluschickie and they stopped dead, puffing and blowing. Then he
stepped near and the seals began to move, and Kerick headed them inland,
and they never tried to get back to their companions. Hundreds and
hundreds of thousands of seals watched them being driven, but they went
on playing just the same. Kotick was the only one who asked questions,
and none of his companions could tell him anything, except that the
men always drove seals in that way for six weeks or two months of every
year.

"I am going to follow," he said, and his eyes nearly popped out of his
head as he shuffled along in the wake of the herd.

"The white seal is coming after us," cried Patalamon. "That's the first
time a seal has ever come to the killing-grounds alone."

"Hsh! Don't look behind you," said Kerick. "It is Zaharrof's ghost! I
must speak to the priest about this."

The distance to the killing-grounds was only half a mile, but it took an
hour to cover, because if the seals went too fast Kerick knew that they
would get heated and then their fur would come off in patches when they
were skinned. So they went on very slowly, past Sea Lion's Neck, past
Webster House, till they came to the Salt House just beyond the sight
of the seals on the beach. Kotick followed, panting and wondering.
He thought that he was at the world's end, but the roar of the seal
nurseries behind him sounded as loud as the roar of a train in a tunnel.
Then Kerick sat down on the moss and pulled out a heavy pewter watch
and let the drove cool off for thirty minutes, and Kotick could hear the
fog-dew dripping off the brim of his cap. Then ten or twelve men, each
with an iron-bound club three or four feet long, came up, and Kerick
pointed out one or two of the drove that were bitten by their companions
or too hot, and the men kicked those aside with their heavy boots made
of the skin of a walrus's throat, and then Kerick said, "Let go!" and
then the men clubbed the seals on the head as fast as they could.

Ten minutes later little Kotick did not recognize his friends any more,
for their skins were ripped off from the nose to the hind flippers,
whipped off and thrown down on the ground in a pile. That was enough
for Kotick. He turned and galloped (a seal can gallop very swiftly for
a short time) back to the sea; his little new mustache bristling with
horror. At Sea Lion's Neck, where the great sea lions sit on the edge
of the surf, he flung himself flipper-overhead into the cool water and
rocked there, gasping miserably. "What's here?" said a sea lion gruffly,
for as a rule the sea lions keep themselves to themselves.

"Scoochnie! Ochen scoochnie!" ("I'm lonesome, very lonesome!") said
Kotick. "They're killing all the holluschickie on all the beaches!"

The Sea Lion turned his head inshore. "Nonsense!" he said. "Your
friends are making as much noise as ever. You must have seen old Kerick
polishing off a drove. He's done that for thirty years."

"It's horrible," said Kotick, backing water as a wave went over him, and
steadying himself with a screw stroke of his flippers that brought him
all standing within three inches of a jagged edge of rock.

"Well done for a yearling!" said the Sea Lion, who could appreciate good
swimming. "I suppose it is rather awful from your way of looking at it,
but if you seals will come here year after year, of course the men get
to know of it, and unless you can find an island where no men ever come
you will always be driven."

"Isn't there any such island?" began Kotick.

"I've followed the poltoos [the halibut] for twenty years, and I can't
say I've found it yet. But look here--you seem to have a fondness for
talking to your betters--suppose you go to Walrus Islet and talk to
Sea Vitch. He may know something. Don't flounce off like that. It's a
six-mile swim, and if I were you I should haul out and take a nap first,
little one."

Kotick thought that that was good advice, so he swam round to his own
beach, hauled out, and slept for half an hour, twitching all over, as
seals will. Then he headed straight for Walrus Islet, a little low sheet
of rocky island almost due northeast from Novastoshnah, all ledges and
rock and gulls' nests, where the walrus herded by themselves.

He landed close to old Sea Vitch--the big, ugly, bloated, pimpled,
fat-necked, long-tusked walrus of the North Pacific, who has no manners
except when he is asleep--as he was then, with his hind flippers half in
and half out of the surf.

"Wake up!" barked Kotick, for the gulls were making a great noise.

"Hah! Ho! Hmph! What's that?" said Sea Vitch, and he struck the next
walrus a blow with his tusks and waked him up, and the next struck the
next, and so on till they were all awake and staring in every direction
but the right one.

"Hi! It's me," said Kotick, bobbing in the surf and looking like a
little white slug.

"Well! May I be--skinned!" said Sea Vitch, and they all looked at Kotick
as you can fancy a club full of drowsy old gentlemen would look at a
little boy. Kotick did not care to hear any more about skinning just
then; he had seen enough of it. So he called out: "Isn't there any place
for seals to go where men don't ever come?"

"Go and find out," said Sea Vitch, shutting his eyes. "Run away. We're
busy here."

Kotick made his dolphin-jump in the air and shouted as loud as he could:
"Clam-eater! Clam-eater!" He knew that Sea Vitch never caught a fish in
his life but always rooted for clams and seaweed; though he pretended to
be a very terrible person. Naturally the Chickies and the Gooverooskies
and the Epatkas--the Burgomaster Gulls and the Kittiwakes and the
Puffins, who are always looking for a chance to be rude, took up the
cry, and--so Limmershin told me--for nearly five minutes you could not
have heard a gun fired on Walrus Islet. All the population was yelling
and screaming "Clam-eater! Stareek [old man]!" while Sea Vitch rolled
from side to side grunting and coughing.

"Now will you tell?" said Kotick, all out of breath.

"Go and ask Sea Cow," said Sea Vitch. "If he is living still, he'll be
able to tell you."

"How shall I know Sea Cow when I meet him?" said Kotick, sheering off.

"He's the only thing in the sea uglier than Sea Vitch," screamed a
Burgomaster gull, wheeling under Sea Vitch's nose. "Uglier, and with
worse manners! Stareek!"

Kotick swam back to Novastoshnah, leaving the gulls to scream. There he
found that no one sympathized with him in his little attempt to discover
a quiet place for the seals. They told him that men had always driven
the holluschickie--it was part of the day's work--and that if he did not
like to see ugly things he should not have gone to the killing grounds.
But none of the other seals had seen the killing, and that made the
difference between him and his friends. Besides, Kotick was a white
seal.

"What you must do," said old Sea Catch, after he had heard his son's
adventures, "is to grow up and be a big seal like your father, and have
a nursery on the beach, and then they will leave you alone. In another
five years you ought to be able to fight for yourself." Even gentle
Matkah, his mother, said: "You will never be able to stop the killing.
Go and play in the sea, Kotick." And Kotick went off and danced the
Fire-dance with a very heavy little heart.

That autumn he left the beach as soon as he could, and set off alone
because of a notion in his bullet-head. He was going to find Sea Cow,
if there was such a person in the sea, and he was going to find a quiet
island with good firm beaches for seals to live on, where men could not
get at them. So he explored and explored by himself from the North to
the South Pacific, swimming as much as three hundred miles in a day
and a night. He met with more adventures than can be told, and narrowly
escaped being caught by the Basking Shark, and the Spotted Shark, and
the Hammerhead, and he met all the untrustworthy ruffians that loaf up
and down the seas, and the heavy polite fish, and the scarlet spotted
scallops that are moored in one place for hundreds of years, and grow
very proud of it; but he never met Sea Cow, and he never found an island
that he could fancy.

If the beach was good and hard, with a slope behind it for seals to play
on, there was always the smoke of a whaler on the horizon, boiling down
blubber, and Kotick knew what that meant. Or else he could see that
seals had once visited the island and been killed off, and Kotick knew
that where men had come once they would come again.

He picked up with an old stumpy-tailed albatross, who told him that
Kerguelen Island was the very place for peace and quiet, and when Kotick
went down there he was all but smashed to pieces against some wicked
black cliffs in a heavy sleet-storm with lightning and thunder. Yet as
he pulled out against the gale he could see that even there had once
been a seal nursery. And it was so in all the other islands that he
visited.

Limmershin gave a long list of them, for he said that Kotick spent five
seasons exploring, with a four months' rest each year at Novastoshnah,
when the holluschickie used to make fun of him and his imaginary
islands. He went to the Gallapagos, a horrid dry place on the Equator,
where he was nearly baked to death; he went to the Georgia Islands,
the Orkneys, Emerald Island, Little Nightingale Island, Gough's Island,
Bouvet's Island, the Crossets, and even to a little speck of an island
south of the Cape of Good Hope. But everywhere the People of the Sea
told him the same things. Seals had come to those islands once upon a
time, but men had killed them all off. Even when he swam thousands of
miles out of the Pacific and got to a place called Cape Corrientes (that
was when he was coming back from Gough's Island), he found a few hundred
mangy seals on a rock and they told him that men came there too.

That nearly broke his heart, and he headed round the Horn back to his
own beaches; and on his way north he hauled out on an island full of
green trees, where he found an old, old seal who was dying, and Kotick
caught fish for him and told him all his sorrows. "Now," said Kotick,
"I am going back to Novastoshnah, and if I am driven to the killing-pens
with the holluschickie I shall not care."

The old seal said, "Try once more. I am the last of the Lost Rookery of
Masafuera, and in the days when men killed us by the hundred thousand
there was a story on the beaches that some day a white seal would come
out of the North and lead the seal people to a quiet place. I am old,
and I shall never live to see that day, but others will. Try once more."

And Kotick curled up his mustache (it was a beauty) and said, "I am the
only white seal that has ever been born on the beaches, and I am the
only seal, black or white, who ever thought of looking for new islands."

This cheered him immensely; and when he came back to Novastoshnah that
summer, Matkah, his mother, begged him to marry and settle down, for
he was no longer a holluschick but a full-grown sea-catch, with a curly
white mane on his shoulders, as heavy, as big, and as fierce as his
father. "Give me another season," he said. "Remember, Mother, it is
always the seventh wave that goes farthest up the beach."

Curiously enough, there was another seal who thought that she would put
off marrying till the next year, and Kotick danced the Fire-dance with
her all down Lukannon Beach the night before he set off on his last
exploration. This time he went westward, because he had fallen on the
trail of a great shoal of halibut, and he needed at least one hundred
pounds of fish a day to keep him in good condition. He chased them till
he was tired, and then he curled himself up and went to sleep on the
hollows of the ground swell that sets in to Copper Island. He knew the
coast perfectly well, so about midnight, when he felt himself gently
bumped on a weed-bed, he said, "Hm, tide's running strong tonight," and
turning over under water opened his eyes slowly and stretched. Then
he jumped like a cat, for he saw huge things nosing about in the shoal
water and browsing on the heavy fringes of the weeds.

"By the Great Combers of Magellan!" he said, beneath his mustache. "Who
in the Deep Sea are these people?"

They were like no walrus, sea lion, seal, bear, whale, shark, fish,
squid, or scallop that Kotick had ever seen before. They were between
twenty and thirty feet long, and they had no hind flippers, but a
shovel-like tail that looked as if it had been whittled out of wet
leather. Their heads were the most foolish-looking things you ever saw,
and they balanced on the ends of their tails in deep water when they
weren't grazing, bowing solemnly to each other and waving their front
flippers as a fat man waves his arm.

"Ahem!" said Kotick. "Good sport, gentlemen?" The big things answered by
bowing and waving their flippers like the Frog Footman. When they began
feeding again Kotick saw that their upper lip was split into two pieces
that they could twitch apart about a foot and bring together again with
a whole bushel of seaweed between the splits. They tucked the stuff into
their mouths and chumped solemnly.

"Messy style of feeding, that," said Kotick. They bowed again, and
Kotick began to lose his temper. "Very good," he said. "If you do happen
to have an extra joint in your front flipper you needn't show off so. I
see you bow gracefully, but I should like to know your names." The split
lips moved and twitched; and the glassy green eyes stared, but they did
not speak.

"Well!" said Kotick. "You're the only people I've ever met uglier than
Sea Vitch--and with worse manners."

Then he remembered in a flash what the Burgomaster gull had screamed
to him when he was a little yearling at Walrus Islet, and he tumbled
backward in the water, for he knew that he had found Sea Cow at last.

The sea cows went on schlooping and grazing and chumping in the weed,
and Kotick asked them questions in every language that he had picked
up in his travels; and the Sea People talk nearly as many languages as
human beings. But the sea cows did not answer because Sea Cow cannot
talk. He has only six bones in his neck where he ought to have seven,
and they say under the sea that that prevents him from speaking even
to his companions. But, as you know, he has an extra joint in his
foreflipper, and by waving it up and down and about he makes what
answers to a sort of clumsy telegraphic code.

By daylight Kotick's mane was standing on end and his temper was gone
where the dead crabs go. Then the Sea Cow began to travel northward very
slowly, stopping to hold absurd bowing councils from time to time, and
Kotick followed them, saying to himself, "People who are such idiots as
these are would have been killed long ago if they hadn't found out some
safe island. And what is good enough for the Sea Cow is good enough for
the Sea Catch. All the same, I wish they'd hurry."

It was weary work for Kotick. The herd never went more than forty or
fifty miles a day, and stopped to feed at night, and kept close to the
shore all the time; while Kotick swam round them, and over them, and
under them, but he could not hurry them up one-half mile. As they went
farther north they held a bowing council every few hours, and Kotick
nearly bit off his mustache with impatience till he saw that they were
following up a warm current of water, and then he respected them more.

One night they sank through the shiny water--sank like stones--and for
the first time since he had known them began to swim quickly. Kotick
followed, and the pace astonished him, for he never dreamed that Sea Cow
was anything of a swimmer. They headed for a cliff by the shore--a cliff
that ran down into deep water, and plunged into a dark hole at the
foot of it, twenty fathoms under the sea. It was a long, long swim, and
Kotick badly wanted fresh air before he was out of the dark tunnel they
led him through.

"My wig!" he said, when he rose, gasping and puffing, into open water at
the farther end. "It was a long dive, but it was worth it."

The sea cows had separated and were browsing lazily along the edges of
the finest beaches that Kotick had ever seen. There were long
stretches of smooth-worn rock running for miles, exactly fitted to make
seal-nurseries, and there were play-grounds of hard sand sloping inland
behind them, and there were rollers for seals to dance in, and long
grass to roll in, and sand dunes to climb up and down, and, best of all,
Kotick knew by the feel of the water, which never deceives a true sea
catch, that no men had ever come there.

The first thing he did was to assure himself that the fishing was good,
and then he swam along the beaches and counted up the delightful low
sandy islands half hidden in the beautiful rolling fog. Away to the
northward, out to sea, ran a line of bars and shoals and rocks that
would never let a ship come within six miles of the beach, and between
the islands and the mainland was a stretch of deep water that ran up to
the perpendicular cliffs, and somewhere below the cliffs was the mouth
of the tunnel.

"It's Novastoshnah over again, but ten times better," said Kotick. "Sea
Cow must be wiser than I thought. Men can't come down the cliffs, even
if there were any men; and the shoals to seaward would knock a ship to
splinters. If any place in the sea is safe, this is it."

He began to think of the seal he had left behind him, but though he was
in a hurry to go back to Novastoshnah, he thoroughly explored the new
country, so that he would be able to answer all questions.

Then he dived and made sure of the mouth of the tunnel, and raced
through to the southward. No one but a sea cow or a seal would have
dreamed of there being such a place, and when he looked back at the
cliffs even Kotick could hardly believe that he had been under them.

He was six days going home, though he was not swimming slowly; and when
he hauled out just above Sea Lion's Neck the first person he met was the
seal who had been waiting for him, and she saw by the look in his eyes
that he had found his island at last.

But the holluschickie and Sea Catch, his father, and all the other seals
laughed at him when he told them what he had discovered, and a young
seal about his own age said, "This is all very well, Kotick, but you
can't come from no one knows where and order us off like this. Remember
we've been fighting for our nurseries, and that's a thing you never did.
You preferred prowling about in the sea."

The other seals laughed at this, and the young seal began twisting his
head from side to side. He had just married that year, and was making a
great fuss about it.

"I've no nursery to fight for," said Kotick. "I only want to show you
all a place where you will be safe. What's the use of fighting?"

"Oh, if you're trying to back out, of course I've no more to say," said
the young seal with an ugly chuckle.

"Will you come with me if I win?" said Kotick. And a green light came
into his eye, for he was very angry at having to fight at all.

"Very good," said the young seal carelessly. "If you win, I'll come."

He had no time to change his mind, for Kotick's head was out and his
teeth sunk in the blubber of the young seal's neck. Then he threw
himself back on his haunches and hauled his enemy down the beach, shook
him, and knocked him over. Then Kotick roared to the seals: "I've done
my best for you these five seasons past. I've found you the island where
you'll be safe, but unless your heads are dragged off your silly necks
you won't believe. I'm going to teach you now. Look out for yourselves!"

Limmershin told me that never in his life--and Limmershin sees ten
thousand big seals fighting every year--never in all his little life
did he see anything like Kotick's charge into the nurseries. He flung
himself at the biggest sea catch he could find, caught him by the
throat, choked him and bumped him and banged him till he grunted for
mercy, and then threw him aside and attacked the next. You see, Kotick
had never fasted for four months as the big seals did every year, and
his deep-sea swimming trips kept him in perfect condition, and, best
of all, he had never fought before. His curly white mane stood up with
rage, and his eyes flamed, and his big dog teeth glistened, and he was
splendid to look at. Old Sea Catch, his father, saw him tearing past,
hauling the grizzled old seals about as though they had been halibut,
and upsetting the young bachelors in all directions; and Sea Catch gave
a roar and shouted: "He may be a fool, but he is the best fighter on the
beaches! Don't tackle your father, my son! He's with you!"

Kotick roared in answer, and old Sea Catch waddled in with his mustache
on end, blowing like a locomotive, while Matkah and the seal that was
going to marry Kotick cowered down and admired their men-folk. It was
a gorgeous fight, for the two fought as long as there was a seal that
dared lift up his head, and when there were none they paraded grandly up
and down the beach side by side, bellowing.

At night, just as the Northern Lights were winking and flashing through
the fog, Kotick climbed a bare rock and looked down on the scattered
nurseries and the torn and bleeding seals. "Now," he said, "I've taught
you your lesson."

"My wig!" said old Sea Catch, boosting himself up stiffly, for he was
fearfully mauled. "The Killer Whale himself could not have cut them up
worse. Son, I'm proud of you, and what's more, I'll come with you to
your island--if there is such a place."

"Hear you, fat pigs of the sea. Who comes with me to the Sea Cow's
tunnel? Answer, or I shall teach you again," roared Kotick.

There was a murmur like the ripple of the tide all up and down the
beaches. "We will come," said thousands of tired voices. "We will follow
Kotick, the White Seal."

Then Kotick dropped his head between his shoulders and shut his eyes
proudly. He was not a white seal any more, but red from head to tail.
All the same he would have scorned to look at or touch one of his
wounds.

A week later he and his army (nearly ten thousand holluschickie and old
seals) went away north to the Sea Cow's tunnel, Kotick leading them,
and the seals that stayed at Novastoshnah called them idiots. But next
spring, when they all met off the fishing banks of the Pacific, Kotick's
seals told such tales of the new beaches beyond Sea Cow's tunnel that
more and more seals left Novastoshnah. Of course it was not all done at
once, for the seals are not very clever, and they need a long time to
turn things over in their minds, but year after year more seals went
away from Novastoshnah, and Lukannon, and the other nurseries, to the
quiet, sheltered beaches where Kotick sits all the summer through,
getting bigger and fatter and stronger each year, while the
holluschickie play around him, in that sea where no man comes.




Lukannon

This is the great deep-sea song that all the St. Paul seals sing when
they are heading back to their beaches in the summer. It is a sort of
very sad seal National Anthem.

     I met my mates in the morning (and, oh, but I am old!)
     Where roaring on the ledges the summer ground-swell rolled;
     I heard them lift the chorus that drowned the breakers' song--
     The Beaches of Lukannon--two million voices strong.

     The song of pleasant stations beside the salt lagoons,
     The song of blowing squadrons that shuffled down the dunes,
     The song of midnight dances that churned the sea to flame--
     The Beaches of Lukannon--before the sealers came!

     I met my mates in the morning (I'll never meet them more!);
     They came and went in legions that darkened all the shore.
     And o'er the foam-flecked offing as far as voice could reach
     We hailed the landing-parties and we sang them up the beach.

     The Beaches of Lukannon--the winter wheat so tall--
     The dripping, crinkled lichens, and the sea-fog drenching all!
     The platforms of our playground, all shining smooth and worn!
     The Beaches of Lukannon--the home where we were born!

     I met my mates in the morning, a broken, scattered band.
     Men shoot us in the water and club us on the land;
     Men drive us to the Salt House like silly sheep and tame,
     And still we sing Lukannon--before the sealers came.

     Wheel down, wheel down to southward; oh, Gooverooska, go!
     And tell the Deep-Sea Viceroys the story of our woe;
     Ere, empty as the shark's egg the tempest flings ashore,
     The Beaches of Lukannon shall know their sons no more!




"Rikki-Tikki-Tavi"

     At the hole where he went in
     Red-Eye called to Wrinkle-Skin.
     Hear what little Red-Eye saith:
     "Nag, come up and dance with death!"

     Eye to eye and head to head,
        (Keep the measure, Nag.)
     This shall end when one is dead;
        (At thy pleasure, Nag.)
     Turn for turn and twist for twist--
        (Run and hide thee, Nag.)
     Hah!  The hooded Death has missed!
        (Woe betide thee, Nag!)

This is the story of the great war that Rikki-tikki-tavi fought
single-handed, through the bath-rooms of the big bungalow in Segowlee
cantonment. Darzee, the Tailorbird, helped him, and Chuchundra, the
musk-rat, who never comes out into the middle of the floor, but always
creeps round by the wall, gave him advice, but Rikki-tikki did the real
fighting.

He was a mongoose, rather like a little cat in his fur and his tail, but
quite like a weasel in his head and his habits. His eyes and the end
of his restless nose were pink. He could scratch himself anywhere he
pleased with any leg, front or back, that he chose to use. He could
fluff up his tail till it looked like a bottle brush, and his war cry as
he scuttled through the long grass was: "Rikk-tikk-tikki-tikki-tchk!"

One day, a high summer flood washed him out of the burrow where he lived
with his father and mother, and carried him, kicking and clucking, down
a roadside ditch. He found a little wisp of grass floating there, and
clung to it till he lost his senses. When he revived, he was lying in
the hot sun on the middle of a garden path, very draggled indeed, and a
small boy was saying, "Here's a dead mongoose. Let's have a funeral."

"No," said his mother, "let's take him in and dry him. Perhaps he isn't
really dead."

They took him into the house, and a big man picked him up between his
finger and thumb and said he was not dead but half choked. So they
wrapped him in cotton wool, and warmed him over a little fire, and he
opened his eyes and sneezed.

"Now," said the big man (he was an Englishman who had just moved into
the bungalow), "don't frighten him, and we'll see what he'll do."

It is the hardest thing in the world to frighten a mongoose, because
he is eaten up from nose to tail with curiosity. The motto of all
the mongoose family is "Run and find out," and Rikki-tikki was a true
mongoose. He looked at the cotton wool, decided that it was not good to
eat, ran all round the table, sat up and put his fur in order, scratched
himself, and jumped on the small boy's shoulder.

"Don't be frightened, Teddy," said his father. "That's his way of making
friends."

"Ouch! He's tickling under my chin," said Teddy.

Rikki-tikki looked down between the boy's collar and neck, snuffed at
his ear, and climbed down to the floor, where he sat rubbing his nose.

"Good gracious," said Teddy's mother, "and that's a wild creature! I
suppose he's so tame because we've been kind to him."

"All mongooses are like that," said her husband. "If Teddy doesn't pick
him up by the tail, or try to put him in a cage, he'll run in and out of
the house all day long. Let's give him something to eat."

They gave him a little piece of raw meat. Rikki-tikki liked it
immensely, and when it was finished he went out into the veranda and sat
in the sunshine and fluffed up his fur to make it dry to the roots. Then
he felt better.

"There are more things to find out about in this house," he said to
himself, "than all my family could find out in all their lives. I shall
certainly stay and find out."

He spent all that day roaming over the house. He nearly drowned himself
in the bath-tubs, put his nose into the ink on a writing table, and
burned it on the end of the big man's cigar, for he climbed up in the
big man's lap to see how writing was done. At nightfall he ran into
Teddy's nursery to watch how kerosene lamps were lighted, and when Teddy
went to bed Rikki-tikki climbed up too. But he was a restless companion,
because he had to get up and attend to every noise all through the
night, and find out what made it. Teddy's mother and father came in,
the last thing, to look at their boy, and Rikki-tikki was awake on
the pillow. "I don't like that," said Teddy's mother. "He may bite the
child." "He'll do no such thing," said the father. "Teddy's safer with
that little beast than if he had a bloodhound to watch him. If a snake
came into the nursery now--"

But Teddy's mother wouldn't think of anything so awful.

Early in the morning Rikki-tikki came to early breakfast in the veranda
riding on Teddy's shoulder, and they gave him banana and some boiled
egg. He sat on all their laps one after the other, because every
well-brought-up mongoose always hopes to be a house mongoose some day
and have rooms to run about in; and Rikki-tikki's mother (she used to
live in the general's house at Segowlee) had carefully told Rikki what
to do if ever he came across white men.

Then Rikki-tikki went out into the garden to see what was to be seen.
It was a large garden, only half cultivated, with bushes, as big as
summer-houses, of Marshal Niel roses, lime and orange trees, clumps of
bamboos, and thickets of high grass. Rikki-tikki licked his lips. "This
is a splendid hunting-ground," he said, and his tail grew bottle-brushy
at the thought of it, and he scuttled up and down the garden, snuffing
here and there till he heard very sorrowful voices in a thorn-bush.

It was Darzee, the Tailorbird, and his wife. They had made a beautiful
nest by pulling two big leaves together and stitching them up the edges
with fibers, and had filled the hollow with cotton and downy fluff. The
nest swayed to and fro, as they sat on the rim and cried.

"What is the matter?" asked Rikki-tikki.

"We are very miserable," said Darzee. "One of our babies fell out of the
nest yesterday and Nag ate him."

"H'm!" said Rikki-tikki, "that is very sad--but I am a stranger here.
Who is Nag?"

Darzee and his wife only cowered down in the nest without answering, for
from the thick grass at the foot of the bush there came a low hiss--a
horrid cold sound that made Rikki-tikki jump back two clear feet. Then
inch by inch out of the grass rose up the head and spread hood of Nag,
the big black cobra, and he was five feet long from tongue to tail.
When he had lifted one-third of himself clear of the ground, he stayed
balancing to and fro exactly as a dandelion tuft balances in the wind,
and he looked at Rikki-tikki with the wicked snake's eyes that never
change their expression, whatever the snake may be thinking of.

"Who is Nag?" said he. "I am Nag. The great God Brahm put his mark upon
all our people, when the first cobra spread his hood to keep the sun off
Brahm as he slept. Look, and be afraid!"

He spread out his hood more than ever, and Rikki-tikki saw the
spectacle-mark on the back of it that looks exactly like the eye part
of a hook-and-eye fastening. He was afraid for the minute, but it is
impossible for a mongoose to stay frightened for any length of time, and
though Rikki-tikki had never met a live cobra before, his mother had fed
him on dead ones, and he knew that all a grown mongoose's business in
life was to fight and eat snakes. Nag knew that too and, at the bottom
of his cold heart, he was afraid.

"Well," said Rikki-tikki, and his tail began to fluff up again, "marks
or no marks, do you think it is right for you to eat fledglings out of a
nest?"

Nag was thinking to himself, and watching the least little movement in
the grass behind Rikki-tikki. He knew that mongooses in the garden
meant death sooner or later for him and his family, but he wanted to get
Rikki-tikki off his guard. So he dropped his head a little, and put it
on one side.

"Let us talk," he said. "You eat eggs. Why should not I eat birds?"

"Behind you! Look behind you!" sang Darzee.

Rikki-tikki knew better than to waste time in staring. He jumped up in
the air as high as he could go, and just under him whizzed by the head
of Nagaina, Nag's wicked wife. She had crept up behind him as he was
talking, to make an end of him. He heard her savage hiss as the stroke
missed. He came down almost across her back, and if he had been an old
mongoose he would have known that then was the time to break her back
with one bite; but he was afraid of the terrible lashing return stroke
of the cobra. He bit, indeed, but did not bite long enough, and he
jumped clear of the whisking tail, leaving Nagaina torn and angry.

"Wicked, wicked Darzee!" said Nag, lashing up as high as he could reach
toward the nest in the thorn-bush. But Darzee had built it out of reach
of snakes, and it only swayed to and fro.

Rikki-tikki felt his eyes growing red and hot (when a mongoose's eyes
grow red, he is angry), and he sat back on his tail and hind legs like a
little kangaroo, and looked all round him, and chattered with rage. But
Nag and Nagaina had disappeared into the grass. When a snake misses its
stroke, it never says anything or gives any sign of what it means to do
next. Rikki-tikki did not care to follow them, for he did not feel sure
that he could manage two snakes at once. So he trotted off to the gravel
path near the house, and sat down to think. It was a serious matter for
him.

If you read the old books of natural history, you will find they say
that when the mongoose fights the snake and happens to get bitten,
he runs off and eats some herb that cures him. That is not true.
The victory is only a matter of quickness of eye and quickness of
foot--snake's blow against mongoose's jump--and as no eye can follow the
motion of a snake's head when it strikes, this makes things much more
wonderful than any magic herb. Rikki-tikki knew he was a young mongoose,
and it made him all the more pleased to think that he had managed to
escape a blow from behind. It gave him confidence in himself, and when
Teddy came running down the path, Rikki-tikki was ready to be petted.

But just as Teddy was stooping, something wriggled a little in the dust,
and a tiny voice said: "Be careful. I am Death!" It was Karait, the
dusty brown snakeling that lies for choice on the dusty earth; and his
bite is as dangerous as the cobra's. But he is so small that nobody
thinks of him, and so he does the more harm to people.

Rikki-tikki's eyes grew red again, and he danced up to Karait with the
peculiar rocking, swaying motion that he had inherited from his family.
It looks very funny, but it is so perfectly balanced a gait that you can
fly off from it at any angle you please, and in dealing with snakes this
is an advantage. If Rikki-tikki had only known, he was doing a much more
dangerous thing than fighting Nag, for Karait is so small, and can turn
so quickly, that unless Rikki bit him close to the back of the head,
he would get the return stroke in his eye or his lip. But Rikki did not
know. His eyes were all red, and he rocked back and forth, looking for
a good place to hold. Karait struck out. Rikki jumped sideways and
tried to run in, but the wicked little dusty gray head lashed within a
fraction of his shoulder, and he had to jump over the body, and the head
followed his heels close.

Teddy shouted to the house: "Oh, look here! Our mongoose is killing a
snake." And Rikki-tikki heard a scream from Teddy's mother. His father
ran out with a stick, but by the time he came up, Karait had lunged out
once too far, and Rikki-tikki had sprung, jumped on the snake's back,
dropped his head far between his forelegs, bitten as high up the back
as he could get hold, and rolled away. That bite paralyzed Karait, and
Rikki-tikki was just going to eat him up from the tail, after the custom
of his family at dinner, when he remembered that a full meal makes a
slow mongoose, and if he wanted all his strength and quickness ready, he
must keep himself thin.

He went away for a dust bath under the castor-oil bushes, while
Teddy's father beat the dead Karait. "What is the use of that?" thought
Rikki-tikki. "I have settled it all;" and then Teddy's mother picked
him up from the dust and hugged him, crying that he had saved Teddy
from death, and Teddy's father said that he was a providence, and Teddy
looked on with big scared eyes. Rikki-tikki was rather amused at all the
fuss, which, of course, he did not understand. Teddy's mother might just
as well have petted Teddy for playing in the dust. Rikki was thoroughly
enjoying himself.

That night at dinner, walking to and fro among the wine-glasses on the
table, he might have stuffed himself three times over with nice things.
But he remembered Nag and Nagaina, and though it was very pleasant to be
patted and petted by Teddy's mother, and to sit on Teddy's shoulder, his
eyes would get red from time to time, and he would go off into his long
war cry of "Rikk-tikk-tikki-tikki-tchk!"

Teddy carried him off to bed, and insisted on Rikki-tikki sleeping under
his chin. Rikki-tikki was too well bred to bite or scratch, but as soon
as Teddy was asleep he went off for his nightly walk round the house,
and in the dark he ran up against Chuchundra, the musk-rat, creeping
around by the wall. Chuchundra is a broken-hearted little beast. He
whimpers and cheeps all the night, trying to make up his mind to run
into the middle of the room. But he never gets there.

"Don't kill me," said Chuchundra, almost weeping. "Rikki-tikki, don't
kill me!"

"Do you think a snake-killer kills muskrats?" said Rikki-tikki
scornfully.

"Those who kill snakes get killed by snakes," said Chuchundra, more
sorrowfully than ever. "And how am I to be sure that Nag won't mistake
me for you some dark night?"

"There's not the least danger," said Rikki-tikki. "But Nag is in the
garden, and I know you don't go there."

"My cousin Chua, the rat, told me--" said Chuchundra, and then he
stopped.

"Told you what?"

"H'sh! Nag is everywhere, Rikki-tikki. You should have talked to Chua in
the garden."

"I didn't--so you must tell me. Quick, Chuchundra, or I'll bite you!"

Chuchundra sat down and cried till the tears rolled off his whiskers.
"I am a very poor man," he sobbed. "I never had spirit enough to run out
into the middle of the room. H'sh! I mustn't tell you anything. Can't
you hear, Rikki-tikki?"

Rikki-tikki listened. The house was as still as still, but he thought he
could just catch the faintest scratch-scratch in the world--a noise as
faint as that of a wasp walking on a window-pane--the dry scratch of a
snake's scales on brick-work.

"That's Nag or Nagaina," he said to himself, "and he is crawling into
the bath-room sluice. You're right, Chuchundra; I should have talked to
Chua."

He stole off to Teddy's bath-room, but there was nothing there, and then
to Teddy's mother's bathroom. At the bottom of the smooth plaster wall
there was a brick pulled out to make a sluice for the bath water, and as
Rikki-tikki stole in by the masonry curb where the bath is put, he heard
Nag and Nagaina whispering together outside in the moonlight.

"When the house is emptied of people," said Nagaina to her husband, "he
will have to go away, and then the garden will be our own again. Go in
quietly, and remember that the big man who killed Karait is the first
one to bite. Then come out and tell me, and we will hunt for Rikki-tikki
together."

"But are you sure that there is anything to be gained by killing the
people?" said Nag.

"Everything. When there were no people in the bungalow, did we have any
mongoose in the garden? So long as the bungalow is empty, we are king
and queen of the garden; and remember that as soon as our eggs in the
melon bed hatch (as they may tomorrow), our children will need room and
quiet."

"I had not thought of that," said Nag. "I will go, but there is no need
that we should hunt for Rikki-tikki afterward. I will kill the big man
and his wife, and the child if I can, and come away quietly. Then the
bungalow will be empty, and Rikki-tikki will go."

Rikki-tikki tingled all over with rage and hatred at this, and then
Nag's head came through the sluice, and his five feet of cold body
followed it. Angry as he was, Rikki-tikki was very frightened as he saw
the size of the big cobra. Nag coiled himself up, raised his head,
and looked into the bathroom in the dark, and Rikki could see his eyes
glitter.

"Now, if I kill him here, Nagaina will know; and if I fight him on
the open floor, the odds are in his favor. What am I to do?" said
Rikki-tikki-tavi.

Nag waved to and fro, and then Rikki-tikki heard him drinking from the
biggest water-jar that was used to fill the bath. "That is good," said
the snake. "Now, when Karait was killed, the big man had a stick. He may
have that stick still, but when he comes in to bathe in the morning he
will not have a stick. I shall wait here till he comes. Nagaina--do you
hear me?--I shall wait here in the cool till daytime."

There was no answer from outside, so Rikki-tikki knew Nagaina had gone
away. Nag coiled himself down, coil by coil, round the bulge at the
bottom of the water jar, and Rikki-tikki stayed still as death. After an
hour he began to move, muscle by muscle, toward the jar. Nag was asleep,
and Rikki-tikki looked at his big back, wondering which would be the
best place for a good hold. "If I don't break his back at the first
jump," said Rikki, "he can still fight. And if he fights--O Rikki!" He
looked at the thickness of the neck below the hood, but that was too
much for him; and a bite near the tail would only make Nag savage.

"It must be the head"' he said at last; "the head above the hood. And,
when I am once there, I must not let go."

Then he jumped. The head was lying a little clear of the water jar,
under the curve of it; and, as his teeth met, Rikki braced his back
against the bulge of the red earthenware to hold down the head. This
gave him just one second's purchase, and he made the most of it. Then he
was battered to and fro as a rat is shaken by a dog--to and fro on the
floor, up and down, and around in great circles, but his eyes were red
and he held on as the body cart-whipped over the floor, upsetting the
tin dipper and the soap dish and the flesh brush, and banged against the
tin side of the bath. As he held he closed his jaws tighter and tighter,
for he made sure he would be banged to death, and, for the honor of his
family, he preferred to be found with his teeth locked. He was dizzy,
aching, and felt shaken to pieces when something went off like a
thunderclap just behind him. A hot wind knocked him senseless and red
fire singed his fur. The big man had been wakened by the noise, and had
fired both barrels of a shotgun into Nag just behind the hood.

Rikki-tikki held on with his eyes shut, for now he was quite sure he was
dead. But the head did not move, and the big man picked him up and said,
"It's the mongoose again, Alice. The little chap has saved our lives
now."

Then Teddy's mother came in with a very white face, and saw what was
left of Nag, and Rikki-tikki dragged himself to Teddy's bedroom and
spent half the rest of the night shaking himself tenderly to find out
whether he really was broken into forty pieces, as he fancied.

When morning came he was very stiff, but well pleased with his doings.
"Now I have Nagaina to settle with, and she will be worse than five
Nags, and there's no knowing when the eggs she spoke of will hatch.
Goodness! I must go and see Darzee," he said.

Without waiting for breakfast, Rikki-tikki ran to the thornbush where
Darzee was singing a song of triumph at the top of his voice. The news
of Nag's death was all over the garden, for the sweeper had thrown the
body on the rubbish-heap.

"Oh, you stupid tuft of feathers!" said Rikki-tikki angrily. "Is this
the time to sing?"

"Nag is dead--is dead--is dead!" sang Darzee. "The valiant Rikki-tikki
caught him by the head and held fast. The big man brought the
bang-stick, and Nag fell in two pieces! He will never eat my babies
again."

"All that's true enough. But where's Nagaina?" said Rikki-tikki, looking
carefully round him.

"Nagaina came to the bathroom sluice and called for Nag," Darzee went
on, "and Nag came out on the end of a stick--the sweeper picked him up
on the end of a stick and threw him upon the rubbish heap. Let us sing
about the great, the red-eyed Rikki-tikki!" And Darzee filled his throat
and sang.

"If I could get up to your nest, I'd roll your babies out!" said
Rikki-tikki. "You don't know when to do the right thing at the right
time. You're safe enough in your nest there, but it's war for me down
here. Stop singing a minute, Darzee."

"For the great, the beautiful Rikki-tikki's sake I will stop," said
Darzee. "What is it, O Killer of the terrible Nag?"

"Where is Nagaina, for the third time?"

"On the rubbish heap by the stables, mourning for Nag. Great is
Rikki-tikki with the white teeth."

"Bother my white teeth! Have you ever heard where she keeps her eggs?"

"In the melon bed, on the end nearest the wall, where the sun strikes
nearly all day. She hid them there weeks ago."

"And you never thought it worth while to tell me? The end nearest the
wall, you said?"

"Rikki-tikki, you are not going to eat her eggs?"

"Not eat exactly; no. Darzee, if you have a grain of sense you will fly
off to the stables and pretend that your wing is broken, and let Nagaina
chase you away to this bush. I must get to the melon-bed, and if I went
there now she'd see me."

Darzee was a feather-brained little fellow who could never hold more
than one idea at a time in his head. And just because he knew that
Nagaina's children were born in eggs like his own, he didn't think at
first that it was fair to kill them. But his wife was a sensible bird,
and she knew that cobra's eggs meant young cobras later on. So she flew
off from the nest, and left Darzee to keep the babies warm, and continue
his song about the death of Nag. Darzee was very like a man in some
ways.

She fluttered in front of Nagaina by the rubbish heap and cried out,
"Oh, my wing is broken! The boy in the house threw a stone at me and
broke it." Then she fluttered more desperately than ever.

Nagaina lifted up her head and hissed, "You warned Rikki-tikki when I
would have killed him. Indeed and truly, you've chosen a bad place to
be lame in." And she moved toward Darzee's wife, slipping along over the
dust.

"The boy broke it with a stone!" shrieked Darzee's wife.

"Well! It may be some consolation to you when you're dead to know that I
shall settle accounts with the boy. My husband lies on the rubbish heap
this morning, but before night the boy in the house will lie very still.
What is the use of running away? I am sure to catch you. Little fool,
look at me!"

Darzee's wife knew better than to do that, for a bird who looks at a
snake's eyes gets so frightened that she cannot move. Darzee's wife
fluttered on, piping sorrowfully, and never leaving the ground, and
Nagaina quickened her pace.

Rikki-tikki heard them going up the path from the stables, and he raced
for the end of the melon patch near the wall. There, in the warm litter
above the melons, very cunningly hidden, he found twenty-five eggs,
about the size of a bantam's eggs, but with whitish skin instead of
shell.

"I was not a day too soon," he said, for he could see the baby cobras
curled up inside the skin, and he knew that the minute they were hatched
they could each kill a man or a mongoose. He bit off the tops of the
eggs as fast as he could, taking care to crush the young cobras, and
turned over the litter from time to time to see whether he had missed
any. At last there were only three eggs left, and Rikki-tikki began to
chuckle to himself, when he heard Darzee's wife screaming:

"Rikki-tikki, I led Nagaina toward the house, and she has gone into the
veranda, and--oh, come quickly--she means killing!"

Rikki-tikki smashed two eggs, and tumbled backward down the melon-bed
with the third egg in his mouth, and scuttled to the veranda as hard as
he could put foot to the ground. Teddy and his mother and father were
there at early breakfast, but Rikki-tikki saw that they were not eating
anything. They sat stone-still, and their faces were white. Nagaina was
coiled up on the matting by Teddy's chair, within easy striking distance
of Teddy's bare leg, and she was swaying to and fro, singing a song of
triumph.

"Son of the big man that killed Nag," she hissed, "stay still. I am not
ready yet. Wait a little. Keep very still, all you three! If you move I
strike, and if you do not move I strike. Oh, foolish people, who killed
my Nag!"

Teddy's eyes were fixed on his father, and all his father could do was
to whisper, "Sit still, Teddy. You mustn't move. Teddy, keep still."

Then Rikki-tikki came up and cried, "Turn round, Nagaina. Turn and
fight!"

"All in good time," said she, without moving her eyes. "I will settle my
account with you presently. Look at your friends, Rikki-tikki. They are
still and white. They are afraid. They dare not move, and if you come a
step nearer I strike."

"Look at your eggs," said Rikki-tikki, "in the melon bed near the wall.
Go and look, Nagaina!"

The big snake turned half around, and saw the egg on the veranda. "Ah-h!
Give it to me," she said.

Rikki-tikki put his paws one on each side of the egg, and his eyes were
blood-red. "What price for a snake's egg? For a young cobra? For a
young king cobra? For the last--the very last of the brood? The ants are
eating all the others down by the melon bed."

Nagaina spun clear round, forgetting everything for the sake of the one
egg. Rikki-tikki saw Teddy's father shoot out a big hand, catch Teddy
by the shoulder, and drag him across the little table with the tea-cups,
safe and out of reach of Nagaina.

"Tricked! Tricked! Tricked! Rikk-tck-tck!" chuckled Rikki-tikki. "The
boy is safe, and it was I--I--I that caught Nag by the hood last night
in the bathroom." Then he began to jump up and down, all four feet
together, his head close to the floor. "He threw me to and fro, but he
could not shake me off. He was dead before the big man blew him in two.
I did it! Rikki-tikki-tck-tck! Come then, Nagaina. Come and fight with
me. You shall not be a widow long."

Nagaina saw that she had lost her chance of killing Teddy, and the egg
lay between Rikki-tikki's paws. "Give me the egg, Rikki-tikki. Give me
the last of my eggs, and I will go away and never come back," she said,
lowering her hood.

"Yes, you will go away, and you will never come back. For you will go
to the rubbish heap with Nag. Fight, widow! The big man has gone for his
gun! Fight!"

Rikki-tikki was bounding all round Nagaina, keeping just out of reach
of her stroke, his little eyes like hot coals. Nagaina gathered herself
together and flung out at him. Rikki-tikki jumped up and backward. Again
and again and again she struck, and each time her head came with a whack
on the matting of the veranda and she gathered herself together like a
watch spring. Then Rikki-tikki danced in a circle to get behind her, and
Nagaina spun round to keep her head to his head, so that the rustle of
her tail on the matting sounded like dry leaves blown along by the wind.

He had forgotten the egg. It still lay on the veranda, and Nagaina came
nearer and nearer to it, till at last, while Rikki-tikki was drawing
breath, she caught it in her mouth, turned to the veranda steps, and
flew like an arrow down the path, with Rikki-tikki behind her. When
the cobra runs for her life, she goes like a whip-lash flicked across a
horse's neck.

Rikki-tikki knew that he must catch her, or all the trouble would begin
again. She headed straight for the long grass by the thorn-bush, and as
he was running Rikki-tikki heard Darzee still singing his foolish little
song of triumph. But Darzee's wife was wiser. She flew off her nest
as Nagaina came along, and flapped her wings about Nagaina's head. If
Darzee had helped they might have turned her, but Nagaina only lowered
her hood and went on. Still, the instant's delay brought Rikki-tikki up
to her, and as she plunged into the rat-hole where she and Nag used to
live, his little white teeth were clenched on her tail, and he went down
with her--and very few mongooses, however wise and old they may be,
care to follow a cobra into its hole. It was dark in the hole; and
Rikki-tikki never knew when it might open out and give Nagaina room to
turn and strike at him. He held on savagely, and stuck out his feet to
act as brakes on the dark slope of the hot, moist earth.

Then the grass by the mouth of the hole stopped waving, and Darzee said,
"It is all over with Rikki-tikki! We must sing his death song. Valiant
Rikki-tikki is dead! For Nagaina will surely kill him underground."

So he sang a very mournful song that he made up on the spur of the
minute, and just as he got to the most touching part, the grass quivered
again, and Rikki-tikki, covered with dirt, dragged himself out of the
hole leg by leg, licking his whiskers. Darzee stopped with a little
shout. Rikki-tikki shook some of the dust out of his fur and sneezed.
"It is all over," he said. "The widow will never come out again." And
the red ants that live between the grass stems heard him, and began to
troop down one after another to see if he had spoken the truth.

Rikki-tikki curled himself up in the grass and slept where he was--slept
and slept till it was late in the afternoon, for he had done a hard
day's work.

"Now," he said, when he awoke, "I will go back to the house. Tell the
Coppersmith, Darzee, and he will tell the garden that Nagaina is dead."

The Coppersmith is a bird who makes a noise exactly like the beating of
a little hammer on a copper pot; and the reason he is always making it
is because he is the town crier to every Indian garden, and tells all
the news to everybody who cares to listen. As Rikki-tikki went up the
path, he heard his "attention" notes like a tiny dinner gong, and
then the steady "Ding-dong-tock! Nag is dead--dong! Nagaina is dead!
Ding-dong-tock!" That set all the birds in the garden singing, and the
frogs croaking, for Nag and Nagaina used to eat frogs as well as little
birds.

When Rikki got to the house, Teddy and Teddy's mother (she looked very
white still, for she had been fainting) and Teddy's father came out and
almost cried over him; and that night he ate all that was given him till
he could eat no more, and went to bed on Teddy's shoulder, where Teddy's
mother saw him when she came to look late at night.

"He saved our lives and Teddy's life," she said to her husband. "Just
think, he saved all our lives."

Rikki-tikki woke up with a jump, for the mongooses are light sleepers.

"Oh, it's you," said he. "What are you bothering for? All the cobras are
dead. And if they weren't, I'm here."

Rikki-tikki had a right to be proud of himself. But he did not grow too
proud, and he kept that garden as a mongoose should keep it, with tooth
and jump and spring and bite, till never a cobra dared show its head
inside the walls.




Darzee's Chant

     (Sung in honor of Rikki-tikki-tavi)

     Singer and tailor am I--
        Doubled the joys that I know--
     Proud of my lilt to the sky,
        Proud of the house that I sew--
     Over and under, so weave I my music--so weave I the house that I
        sew.

     Sing to your fledglings again,
        Mother, oh lift up your head!
     Evil that plagued us is slain,
        Death in the garden lies dead.
     Terror that hid in the roses is impotent--flung on the dung-hill
     and dead!

     Who has delivered us, who?
        Tell me his nest and his name.
     Rikki, the valiant, the true,
        Tikki, with eyeballs of flame,
     Rikk-tikki-tikki, the ivory-fanged, the hunter with eyeballs of
     flame!

     Give him the Thanks of the Birds,
        Bowing with tail feathers spread!
     Praise him with nightingale words--
        Nay, I will praise him instead.
     Hear!  I will sing you the praise of the bottle-tailed Rikki, with
     eyeballs of red!

     (Here Rikki-tikki interrupted, and the rest of the song is
     lost.)




Toomai of the Elephants

     I will remember what I was, I am sick of rope and chain--
        I will remember my old strength and all my forest affairs.
     I will not sell my back to man for a bundle of sugar-cane:
        I will go out to my own kind, and the wood-folk in their lairs.

     I will go out until the day, until the morning break--
        Out to the wind's untainted kiss, the water's clean caress;
     I will forget my ankle-ring and snap my picket stake.
        I will revisit my lost loves, and playmates masterless!

Kala Nag, which means Black Snake, had served the Indian Government in
every way that an elephant could serve it for forty-seven years, and as
he was fully twenty years old when he was caught, that makes him nearly
seventy--a ripe age for an elephant. He remembered pushing, with a big
leather pad on his forehead, at a gun stuck in deep mud, and that was
before the Afghan War of 1842, and he had not then come to his full
strength.

His mother Radha Pyari,--Radha the darling,--who had been caught in the
same drive with Kala Nag, told him, before his little milk tusks had
dropped out, that elephants who were afraid always got hurt. Kala Nag
knew that that advice was good, for the first time that he saw a shell
burst he backed, screaming, into a stand of piled rifles, and the
bayonets pricked him in all his softest places. So, before he was
twenty-five, he gave up being afraid, and so he was the best-loved
and the best-looked-after elephant in the service of the Government of
India. He had carried tents, twelve hundred pounds' weight of tents, on
the march in Upper India. He had been hoisted into a ship at the end of
a steam crane and taken for days across the water, and made to carry a
mortar on his back in a strange and rocky country very far from India,
and had seen the Emperor Theodore lying dead in Magdala, and had
come back again in the steamer entitled, so the soldiers said, to the
Abyssinian War medal. He had seen his fellow elephants die of cold and
epilepsy and starvation and sunstroke up at a place called Ali Musjid,
ten years later; and afterward he had been sent down thousands of miles
south to haul and pile big balks of teak in the timberyards at Moulmein.
There he had half killed an insubordinate young elephant who was
shirking his fair share of work.

After that he was taken off timber-hauling, and employed, with a few
score other elephants who were trained to the business, in helping to
catch wild elephants among the Garo hills. Elephants are very strictly
preserved by the Indian Government. There is one whole department which
does nothing else but hunt them, and catch them, and break them in, and
send them up and down the country as they are needed for work.

Kala Nag stood ten fair feet at the shoulders, and his tusks had been
cut off short at five feet, and bound round the ends, to prevent them
splitting, with bands of copper; but he could do more with those stumps
than any untrained elephant could do with the real sharpened ones. When,
after weeks and weeks of cautious driving of scattered elephants across
the hills, the forty or fifty wild monsters were driven into the last
stockade, and the big drop gate, made of tree trunks lashed together,
jarred down behind them, Kala Nag, at the word of command, would go
into that flaring, trumpeting pandemonium (generally at night, when
the flicker of the torches made it difficult to judge distances), and,
picking out the biggest and wildest tusker of the mob, would hammer
him and hustle him into quiet while the men on the backs of the other
elephants roped and tied the smaller ones.

There was nothing in the way of fighting that Kala Nag, the old wise
Black Snake, did not know, for he had stood up more than once in his
time to the charge of the wounded tiger, and, curling up his soft trunk
to be out of harm's way, had knocked the springing brute sideways in
mid-air with a quick sickle cut of his head, that he had invented all by
himself; had knocked him over, and kneeled upon him with his huge knees
till the life went out with a gasp and a howl, and there was only a
fluffy striped thing on the ground for Kala Nag to pull by the tail.

"Yes," said Big Toomai, his driver, the son of Black Toomai who had
taken him to Abyssinia, and grandson of Toomai of the Elephants who had
seen him caught, "there is nothing that the Black Snake fears except me.
He has seen three generations of us feed him and groom him, and he will
live to see four."

"He is afraid of me also," said Little Toomai, standing up to his full
height of four feet, with only one rag upon him. He was ten years old,
the eldest son of Big Toomai, and, according to custom, he would take
his father's place on Kala Nag's neck when he grew up, and would handle
the heavy iron ankus, the elephant goad, that had been worn smooth by
his father, and his grandfather, and his great-grandfather.

He knew what he was talking of; for he had been born under Kala Nag's
shadow, had played with the end of his trunk before he could walk, had
taken him down to water as soon as he could walk, and Kala Nag would no
more have dreamed of disobeying his shrill little orders than he would
have dreamed of killing him on that day when Big Toomai carried the
little brown baby under Kala Nag's tusks, and told him to salute his
master that was to be.

"Yes," said Little Toomai, "he is afraid of me," and he took long
strides up to Kala Nag, called him a fat old pig, and made him lift up
his feet one after the other.

"Wah!" said Little Toomai, "thou art a big elephant," and he wagged his
fluffy head, quoting his father. "The Government may pay for elephants,
but they belong to us mahouts. When thou art old, Kala Nag, there will
come some rich rajah, and he will buy thee from the Government, on
account of thy size and thy manners, and then thou wilt have nothing
to do but to carry gold earrings in thy ears, and a gold howdah on thy
back, and a red cloth covered with gold on thy sides, and walk at the
head of the processions of the King. Then I shall sit on thy neck, O
Kala Nag, with a silver ankus, and men will run before us with golden
sticks, crying, `Room for the King's elephant!' That will be good, Kala
Nag, but not so good as this hunting in the jungles."

"Umph!" said Big Toomai. "Thou art a boy, and as wild as a buffalo-calf.
This running up and down among the hills is not the best Government
service. I am getting old, and I do not love wild elephants. Give me
brick elephant lines, one stall to each elephant, and big stumps to tie
them to safely, and flat, broad roads to exercise upon, instead of this
come-and-go camping. Aha, the Cawnpore barracks were good. There was a
bazaar close by, and only three hours' work a day."

Little Toomai remembered the Cawnpore elephant-lines and said nothing.
He very much preferred the camp life, and hated those broad, flat roads,
with the daily grubbing for grass in the forage reserve, and the long
hours when there was nothing to do except to watch Kala Nag fidgeting in
his pickets.

What Little Toomai liked was to scramble up bridle paths that only an
elephant could take; the dip into the valley below; the glimpses of the
wild elephants browsing miles away; the rush of the frightened pig and
peacock under Kala Nag's feet; the blinding warm rains, when all the
hills and valleys smoked; the beautiful misty mornings when nobody knew
where they would camp that night; the steady, cautious drive of the wild
elephants, and the mad rush and blaze and hullabaloo of the last night's
drive, when the elephants poured into the stockade like boulders in a
landslide, found that they could not get out, and flung themselves at
the heavy posts only to be driven back by yells and flaring torches and
volleys of blank cartridge.

Even a little boy could be of use there, and Toomai was as useful as
three boys. He would get his torch and wave it, and yell with the
best. But the really good time came when the driving out began, and the
Keddah--that is, the stockade--looked like a picture of the end of the
world, and men had to make signs to one another, because they could not
hear themselves speak. Then Little Toomai would climb up to the top of
one of the quivering stockade posts, his sun-bleached brown hair flying
loose all over his shoulders, and he looking like a goblin in the
torch-light. And as soon as there was a lull you could hear his
high-pitched yells of encouragement to Kala Nag, above the trumpeting
and crashing, and snapping of ropes, and groans of the tethered
elephants. "Mael, mael, Kala Nag! (Go on, go on, Black Snake!) Dant do!
(Give him the tusk!) Somalo! Somalo! (Careful, careful!) Maro! Mar! (Hit
him, hit him!) Mind the post! Arre! Arre! Hai! Yai! Kya-a-ah!" he would
shout, and the big fight between Kala Nag and the wild elephant would
sway to and fro across the Keddah, and the old elephant catchers would
wipe the sweat out of their eyes, and find time to nod to Little Toomai
wriggling with joy on the top of the posts.

He did more than wriggle. One night he slid down from the post and
slipped in between the elephants and threw up the loose end of a rope,
which had dropped, to a driver who was trying to get a purchase on
the leg of a kicking young calf (calves always give more trouble than
full-grown animals). Kala Nag saw him, caught him in his trunk, and
handed him up to Big Toomai, who slapped him then and there, and put him
back on the post.

Next morning he gave him a scolding and said, "Are not good brick
elephant lines and a little tent carrying enough, that thou must needs
go elephant catching on thy own account, little worthless? Now those
foolish hunters, whose pay is less than my pay, have spoken to Petersen
Sahib of the matter." Little Toomai was frightened. He did not know much
of white men, but Petersen Sahib was the greatest white man in the world
to him. He was the head of all the Keddah operations--the man who caught
all the elephants for the Government of India, and who knew more about
the ways of elephants than any living man.

"What--what will happen?" said Little Toomai.

"Happen! The worst that can happen. Petersen Sahib is a madman. Else why
should he go hunting these wild devils? He may even require thee to be
an elephant catcher, to sleep anywhere in these fever-filled jungles,
and at last to be trampled to death in the Keddah. It is well that this
nonsense ends safely. Next week the catching is over, and we of the
plains are sent back to our stations. Then we will march on smooth
roads, and forget all this hunting. But, son, I am angry that thou
shouldst meddle in the business that belongs to these dirty Assamese
jungle folk. Kala Nag will obey none but me, so I must go with him into
the Keddah, but he is only a fighting elephant, and he does not help
to rope them. So I sit at my ease, as befits a mahout,--not a mere
hunter,--a mahout, I say, and a man who gets a pension at the end of
his service. Is the family of Toomai of the Elephants to be trodden
underfoot in the dirt of a Keddah? Bad one! Wicked one! Worthless son!
Go and wash Kala Nag and attend to his ears, and see that there are no
thorns in his feet. Or else Petersen Sahib will surely catch thee and
make thee a wild hunter--a follower of elephant's foot tracks, a jungle
bear. Bah! Shame! Go!"

Little Toomai went off without saying a word, but he told Kala Nag all
his grievances while he was examining his feet. "No matter," said Little
Toomai, turning up the fringe of Kala Nag's huge right ear. "They
have said my name to Petersen Sahib, and perhaps--and perhaps--and
perhaps--who knows? Hai! That is a big thorn that I have pulled out!"

The next few days were spent in getting the elephants together, in
walking the newly caught wild elephants up and down between a couple of
tame ones to prevent them giving too much trouble on the downward march
to the plains, and in taking stock of the blankets and ropes and things
that had been worn out or lost in the forest.

Petersen Sahib came in on his clever she-elephant Pudmini; he had been
paying off other camps among the hills, for the season was coming to an
end, and there was a native clerk sitting at a table under a tree, to
pay the drivers their wages. As each man was paid he went back to his
elephant, and joined the line that stood ready to start. The catchers,
and hunters, and beaters, the men of the regular Keddah, who stayed in
the jungle year in and year out, sat on the backs of the elephants that
belonged to Petersen Sahib's permanent force, or leaned against the
trees with their guns across their arms, and made fun of the drivers who
were going away, and laughed when the newly caught elephants broke the
line and ran about.

Big Toomai went up to the clerk with Little Toomai behind him, and
Machua Appa, the head tracker, said in an undertone to a friend of his,
"There goes one piece of good elephant stuff at least. 'Tis a pity to
send that young jungle-cock to molt in the plains."

Now Petersen Sahib had ears all over him, as a man must have who listens
to the most silent of all living things--the wild elephant. He turned
where he was lying all along on Pudmini's back and said, "What is that?
I did not know of a man among the plains-drivers who had wit enough to
rope even a dead elephant."

"This is not a man, but a boy. He went into the Keddah at the last
drive, and threw Barmao there the rope, when we were trying to get that
young calf with the blotch on his shoulder away from his mother."

Machua Appa pointed at Little Toomai, and Petersen Sahib looked, and
Little Toomai bowed to the earth.

"He throw a rope? He is smaller than a picket-pin. Little one, what is
thy name?" said Petersen Sahib.

Little Toomai was too frightened to speak, but Kala Nag was behind him,
and Toomai made a sign with his hand, and the elephant caught him up in
his trunk and held him level with Pudmini's forehead, in front of the
great Petersen Sahib. Then Little Toomai covered his face with his
hands, for he was only a child, and except where elephants were
concerned, he was just as bashful as a child could be.

"Oho!" said Petersen Sahib, smiling underneath his mustache, "and why
didst thou teach thy elephant that trick? Was it to help thee steal
green corn from the roofs of the houses when the ears are put out to
dry?"

"Not green corn, Protector of the Poor,--melons," said Little Toomai,
and all the men sitting about broke into a roar of laughter. Most of
them had taught their elephants that trick when they were boys. Little
Toomai was hanging eight feet up in the air, and he wished very much
that he were eight feet underground.

"He is Toomai, my son, Sahib," said Big Toomai, scowling. "He is a very
bad boy, and he will end in a jail, Sahib."

"Of that I have my doubts," said Petersen Sahib. "A boy who can face a
full Keddah at his age does not end in jails. See, little one, here are
four annas to spend in sweetmeats because thou hast a little head under
that great thatch of hair. In time thou mayest become a hunter too." Big
Toomai scowled more than ever. "Remember, though, that Keddahs are not
good for children to play in," Petersen Sahib went on.

"Must I never go there, Sahib?" asked Little Toomai with a big gasp.

"Yes." Petersen Sahib smiled again. "When thou hast seen the elephants
dance. That is the proper time. Come to me when thou hast seen the
elephants dance, and then I will let thee go into all the Keddahs."

There was another roar of laughter, for that is an old joke among
elephant-catchers, and it means just never. There are great cleared flat
places hidden away in the forests that are called elephants' ball-rooms,
but even these are only found by accident, and no man has ever seen the
elephants dance. When a driver boasts of his skill and bravery the other
drivers say, "And when didst thou see the elephants dance?"

Kala Nag put Little Toomai down, and he bowed to the earth again and
went away with his father, and gave the silver four-anna piece to his
mother, who was nursing his baby brother, and they all were put up on
Kala Nag's back, and the line of grunting, squealing elephants rolled
down the hill path to the plains. It was a very lively march on account
of the new elephants, who gave trouble at every ford, and needed coaxing
or beating every other minute.

Big Toomai prodded Kala Nag spitefully, for he was very angry, but
Little Toomai was too happy to speak. Petersen Sahib had noticed him,
and given him money, so he felt as a private soldier would feel if he
had been called out of the ranks and praised by his commander-in-chief.

"What did Petersen Sahib mean by the elephant dance?" he said, at last,
softly to his mother.

Big Toomai heard him and grunted. "That thou shouldst never be one of
these hill buffaloes of trackers. That was what he meant. Oh, you in
front, what is blocking the way?"

An Assamese driver, two or three elephants ahead, turned round angrily,
crying: "Bring up Kala Nag, and knock this youngster of mine into good
behavior. Why should Petersen Sahib have chosen me to go down with you
donkeys of the rice fields? Lay your beast alongside, Toomai, and
let him prod with his tusks. By all the Gods of the Hills, these new
elephants are possessed, or else they can smell their companions in the
jungle." Kala Nag hit the new elephant in the ribs and knocked the
wind out of him, as Big Toomai said, "We have swept the hills of wild
elephants at the last catch. It is only your carelessness in driving.
Must I keep order along the whole line?"

"Hear him!" said the other driver. "We have swept the hills! Ho! Ho! You
are very wise, you plains people. Anyone but a mud-head who never saw
the jungle would know that they know that the drives are ended for the
season. Therefore all the wild elephants to-night will--but why should I
waste wisdom on a river-turtle?"

"What will they do?" Little Toomai called out.

"Ohe, little one. Art thou there? Well, I will tell thee, for thou hast
a cool head. They will dance, and it behooves thy father, who has
swept all the hills of all the elephants, to double-chain his pickets
to-night."

"What talk is this?" said Big Toomai. "For forty years, father and son,
we have tended elephants, and we have never heard such moonshine about
dances."

"Yes; but a plainsman who lives in a hut knows only the four walls
of his hut. Well, leave thy elephants unshackled tonight and see what
comes. As for their dancing, I have seen the place where--Bapree-bap!
How many windings has the Dihang River? Here is another ford, and we
must swim the calves. Stop still, you behind there."

And in this way, talking and wrangling and splashing through the rivers,
they made their first march to a sort of receiving camp for the new
elephants. But they lost their tempers long before they got there.

Then the elephants were chained by their hind legs to their big stumps
of pickets, and extra ropes were fitted to the new elephants, and the
fodder was piled before them, and the hill drivers went back to Petersen
Sahib through the afternoon light, telling the plains drivers to be
extra careful that night, and laughing when the plains drivers asked the
reason.

Little Toomai attended to Kala Nag's supper, and as evening fell,
wandered through the camp, unspeakably happy, in search of a tom-tom.
When an Indian child's heart is full, he does not run about and make a
noise in an irregular fashion. He sits down to a sort of revel all by
himself. And Little Toomai had been spoken to by Petersen Sahib! If he
had not found what he wanted, I believe he would have been ill. But the
sweetmeat seller in the camp lent him a little tom-tom--a drum beaten
with the flat of the hand--and he sat down, cross-legged, before Kala
Nag as the stars began to come out, the tom-tom in his lap, and he
thumped and he thumped and he thumped, and the more he thought of the
great honor that had been done to him, the more he thumped, all alone
among the elephant fodder. There was no tune and no words, but the
thumping made him happy.

The new elephants strained at their ropes, and squealed and trumpeted
from time to time, and he could hear his mother in the camp hut putting
his small brother to sleep with an old, old song about the great God
Shiv, who once told all the animals what they should eat. It is a very
soothing lullaby, and the first verse says:

     Shiv, who poured the harvest and made the winds to blow,
     Sitting at the doorways of a day of long ago,
     Gave to each his portion, food and toil and fate,
     From the King upon the guddee to the Beggar at the gate.
        All things made he--Shiva the Preserver.
     Mahadeo!  Mahadeo!  He made all--
     Thorn for the camel, fodder for the kine,
     And mother's heart for sleepy head, O little son of mine!

Little Toomai came in with a joyous tunk-a-tunk at the end of each
verse, till he felt sleepy and stretched himself on the fodder at Kala
Nag's side. At last the elephants began to lie down one after another
as is their custom, till only Kala Nag at the right of the line was
left standing up; and he rocked slowly from side to side, his ears put
forward to listen to the night wind as it blew very slowly across the
hills. The air was full of all the night noises that, taken together,
make one big silence--the click of one bamboo stem against the other,
the rustle of something alive in the undergrowth, the scratch and squawk
of a half-waked bird (birds are awake in the night much more often than
we imagine), and the fall of water ever so far away. Little Toomai slept
for some time, and when he waked it was brilliant moonlight, and Kala
Nag was still standing up with his ears cocked. Little Toomai turned,
rustling in the fodder, and watched the curve of his big back against
half the stars in heaven, and while he watched he heard, so far away
that it sounded no more than a pinhole of noise pricked through the
stillness, the "hoot-toot" of a wild elephant.

All the elephants in the lines jumped up as if they had been shot, and
their grunts at last waked the sleeping mahouts, and they came out and
drove in the picket pegs with big mallets, and tightened this rope and
knotted that till all was quiet. One new elephant had nearly grubbed up
his picket, and Big Toomai took off Kala Nag's leg chain and shackled
that elephant fore-foot to hind-foot, but slipped a loop of grass string
round Kala Nag's leg, and told him to remember that he was tied fast. He
knew that he and his father and his grandfather had done the very same
thing hundreds of times before. Kala Nag did not answer to the order
by gurgling, as he usually did. He stood still, looking out across the
moonlight, his head a little raised and his ears spread like fans, up to
the great folds of the Garo hills.

"Tend to him if he grows restless in the night," said Big Toomai to
Little Toomai, and he went into the hut and slept. Little Toomai was
just going to sleep, too, when he heard the coir string snap with a
little "tang," and Kala Nag rolled out of his pickets as slowly and as
silently as a cloud rolls out of the mouth of a valley. Little Toomai
pattered after him, barefooted, down the road in the moonlight, calling
under his breath, "Kala Nag! Kala Nag! Take me with you, O Kala Nag!"
The elephant turned, without a sound, took three strides back to the
boy in the moonlight, put down his trunk, swung him up to his neck,
and almost before Little Toomai had settled his knees, slipped into the
forest.

There was one blast of furious trumpeting from the lines, and then the
silence shut down on everything, and Kala Nag began to move. Sometimes
a tuft of high grass washed along his sides as a wave washes along the
sides of a ship, and sometimes a cluster of wild-pepper vines would
scrape along his back, or a bamboo would creak where his shoulder
touched it. But between those times he moved absolutely without any
sound, drifting through the thick Garo forest as though it had been
smoke. He was going uphill, but though Little Toomai watched the stars
in the rifts of the trees, he could not tell in what direction.

Then Kala Nag reached the crest of the ascent and stopped for a minute,
and Little Toomai could see the tops of the trees lying all speckled and
furry under the moonlight for miles and miles, and the blue-white mist
over the river in the hollow. Toomai leaned forward and looked, and he
felt that the forest was awake below him--awake and alive and crowded.
A big brown fruit-eating bat brushed past his ear; a porcupine's quills
rattled in the thicket; and in the darkness between the tree stems he
heard a hog-bear digging hard in the moist warm earth, and snuffing as
it digged.

Then the branches closed over his head again, and Kala Nag began to go
down into the valley--not quietly this time, but as a runaway gun goes
down a steep bank--in one rush. The huge limbs moved as steadily as
pistons, eight feet to each stride, and the wrinkled skin of the elbow
points rustled. The undergrowth on either side of him ripped with a
noise like torn canvas, and the saplings that he heaved away right and
left with his shoulders sprang back again and banged him on the flank,
and great trails of creepers, all matted together, hung from his tusks
as he threw his head from side to side and plowed out his pathway. Then
Little Toomai laid himself down close to the great neck lest a swinging
bough should sweep him to the ground, and he wished that he were back in
the lines again.

The grass began to get squashy, and Kala Nag's feet sucked and squelched
as he put them down, and the night mist at the bottom of the valley
chilled Little Toomai. There was a splash and a trample, and the rush of
running water, and Kala Nag strode through the bed of a river, feeling
his way at each step. Above the noise of the water, as it swirled round
the elephant's legs, Little Toomai could hear more splashing and some
trumpeting both upstream and down--great grunts and angry snortings, and
all the mist about him seemed to be full of rolling, wavy shadows.

"Ai!" he said, half aloud, his teeth chattering. "The elephant-folk are
out tonight. It is the dance, then!"

Kala Nag swashed out of the water, blew his trunk clear, and began
another climb. But this time he was not alone, and he had not to make
his path. That was made already, six feet wide, in front of him, where
the bent jungle-grass was trying to recover itself and stand up. Many
elephants must have gone that way only a few minutes before. Little
Toomai looked back, and behind him a great wild tusker with his little
pig's eyes glowing like hot coals was just lifting himself out of the
misty river. Then the trees closed up again, and they went on and up,
with trumpetings and crashings, and the sound of breaking branches on
every side of them.

At last Kala Nag stood still between two tree-trunks at the very top
of the hill. They were part of a circle of trees that grew round an
irregular space of some three or four acres, and in all that space, as
Little Toomai could see, the ground had been trampled down as hard as
a brick floor. Some trees grew in the center of the clearing, but their
bark was rubbed away, and the white wood beneath showed all shiny and
polished in the patches of moonlight. There were creepers hanging from
the upper branches, and the bells of the flowers of the creepers, great
waxy white things like convolvuluses, hung down fast asleep. But
within the limits of the clearing there was not a single blade of
green--nothing but the trampled earth.

The moonlight showed it all iron gray, except where some elephants
stood upon it, and their shadows were inky black. Little Toomai looked,
holding his breath, with his eyes starting out of his head, and as he
looked, more and more and more elephants swung out into the open from
between the tree trunks. Little Toomai could only count up to ten, and
he counted again and again on his fingers till he lost count of the
tens, and his head began to swim. Outside the clearing he could hear
them crashing in the undergrowth as they worked their way up the
hillside, but as soon as they were within the circle of the tree trunks
they moved like ghosts.

There were white-tusked wild males, with fallen leaves and nuts and
twigs lying in the wrinkles of their necks and the folds of their ears;
fat, slow-footed she-elephants, with restless, little pinky black
calves only three or four feet high running under their stomachs; young
elephants with their tusks just beginning to show, and very proud of
them; lanky, scraggy old-maid elephants, with their hollow anxious
faces, and trunks like rough bark; savage old bull elephants, scarred
from shoulder to flank with great weals and cuts of bygone fights,
and the caked dirt of their solitary mud baths dropping from their
shoulders; and there was one with a broken tusk and the marks of the
full-stroke, the terrible drawing scrape, of a tiger's claws on his
side.

They were standing head to head, or walking to and fro across the ground
in couples, or rocking and swaying all by themselves--scores and scores
of elephants.

Toomai knew that so long as he lay still on Kala Nag's neck nothing
would happen to him, for even in the rush and scramble of a Keddah drive
a wild elephant does not reach up with his trunk and drag a man off the
neck of a tame elephant. And these elephants were not thinking of men
that night. Once they started and put their ears forward when they heard
the chinking of a leg iron in the forest, but it was Pudmini, Petersen
Sahib's pet elephant, her chain snapped short off, grunting, snuffling
up the hillside. She must have broken her pickets and come straight from
Petersen Sahib's camp; and Little Toomai saw another elephant, one that
he did not know, with deep rope galls on his back and breast. He, too,
must have run away from some camp in the hills about.

At last there was no sound of any more elephants moving in the forest,
and Kala Nag rolled out from his station between the trees and went into
the middle of the crowd, clucking and gurgling, and all the elephants
began to talk in their own tongue, and to move about.

Still lying down, Little Toomai looked down upon scores and scores of
broad backs, and wagging ears, and tossing trunks, and little rolling
eyes. He heard the click of tusks as they crossed other tusks by
accident, and the dry rustle of trunks twined together, and the chafing
of enormous sides and shoulders in the crowd, and the incessant flick
and hissh of the great tails. Then a cloud came over the moon, and he
sat in black darkness. But the quiet, steady hustling and pushing and
gurgling went on just the same. He knew that there were elephants all
round Kala Nag, and that there was no chance of backing him out of the
assembly; so he set his teeth and shivered. In a Keddah at least there
was torchlight and shouting, but here he was all alone in the dark, and
once a trunk came up and touched him on the knee.

Then an elephant trumpeted, and they all took it up for five or ten
terrible seconds. The dew from the trees above spattered down like rain
on the unseen backs, and a dull booming noise began, not very loud at
first, and Little Toomai could not tell what it was. But it grew and
grew, and Kala Nag lifted up one forefoot and then the other, and
brought them down on the ground--one-two, one-two, as steadily as
trip-hammers. The elephants were stamping all together now, and it
sounded like a war drum beaten at the mouth of a cave. The dew fell from
the trees till there was no more left to fall, and the booming went on,
and the ground rocked and shivered, and Little Toomai put his hands up
to his ears to shut out the sound. But it was all one gigantic jar that
ran through him--this stamp of hundreds of heavy feet on the raw earth.
Once or twice he could feel Kala Nag and all the others surge forward
a few strides, and the thumping would change to the crushing sound of
juicy green things being bruised, but in a minute or two the boom
of feet on hard earth began again. A tree was creaking and groaning
somewhere near him. He put out his arm and felt the bark, but Kala Nag
moved forward, still tramping, and he could not tell where he was in the
clearing. There was no sound from the elephants, except once, when two
or three little calves squeaked together. Then he heard a thump and a
shuffle, and the booming went on. It must have lasted fully two hours,
and Little Toomai ached in every nerve, but he knew by the smell of the
night air that the dawn was coming.

The morning broke in one sheet of pale yellow behind the green hills,
and the booming stopped with the first ray, as though the light had
been an order. Before Little Toomai had got the ringing out of his head,
before even he had shifted his position, there was not an elephant in
sight except Kala Nag, Pudmini, and the elephant with the rope-galls,
and there was neither sign nor rustle nor whisper down the hillsides to
show where the others had gone.

Little Toomai stared again and again. The clearing, as he remembered it,
had grown in the night. More trees stood in the middle of it, but the
undergrowth and the jungle grass at the sides had been rolled back.
Little Toomai stared once more. Now he understood the trampling. The
elephants had stamped out more room--had stamped the thick grass and
juicy cane to trash, the trash into slivers, the slivers into tiny
fibers, and the fibers into hard earth.

"Wah!" said Little Toomai, and his eyes were very heavy. "Kala Nag, my
lord, let us keep by Pudmini and go to Petersen Sahib's camp, or I shall
drop from thy neck."

The third elephant watched the two go away, snorted, wheeled round, and
took his own path. He may have belonged to some little native king's
establishment, fifty or sixty or a hundred miles away.

Two hours later, as Petersen Sahib was eating early breakfast, his
elephants, who had been double chained that night, began to trumpet, and
Pudmini, mired to the shoulders, with Kala Nag, very footsore, shambled
into the camp. Little Toomai's face was gray and pinched, and his
hair was full of leaves and drenched with dew, but he tried to salute
Petersen Sahib, and cried faintly: "The dance--the elephant dance! I
have seen it, and--I die!" As Kala Nag sat down, he slid off his neck in
a dead faint.

But, since native children have no nerves worth speaking of, in two
hours he was lying very contentedly in Petersen Sahib's hammock with
Petersen Sahib's shooting-coat under his head, and a glass of warm milk,
a little brandy, with a dash of quinine, inside of him, and while the
old hairy, scarred hunters of the jungles sat three deep before him,
looking at him as though he were a spirit, he told his tale in short
words, as a child will, and wound up with:

"Now, if I lie in one word, send men to see, and they will find that the
elephant folk have trampled down more room in their dance-room, and
they will find ten and ten, and many times ten, tracks leading to that
dance-room. They made more room with their feet. I have seen it. Kala
Nag took me, and I saw. Also Kala Nag is very leg-weary!"

Little Toomai lay back and slept all through the long afternoon and into
the twilight, and while he slept Petersen Sahib and Machua Appa followed
the track of the two elephants for fifteen miles across the hills.
Petersen Sahib had spent eighteen years in catching elephants, and he
had only once before found such a dance-place. Machua Appa had no need
to look twice at the clearing to see what had been done there, or to
scratch with his toe in the packed, rammed earth.

"The child speaks truth," said he. "All this was done last night, and
I have counted seventy tracks crossing the river. See, Sahib, where
Pudmini's leg-iron cut the bark of that tree! Yes; she was there too."

They looked at one another and up and down, and they wondered. For the
ways of elephants are beyond the wit of any man, black or white, to
fathom.

"Forty years and five," said Machua Appa, "have I followed my lord, the
elephant, but never have I heard that any child of man had seen what
this child has seen. By all the Gods of the Hills, it is--what can we
say?" and he shook his head.

When they got back to camp it was time for the evening meal. Petersen
Sahib ate alone in his tent, but he gave orders that the camp should
have two sheep and some fowls, as well as a double ration of flour and
rice and salt, for he knew that there would be a feast.

Big Toomai had come up hotfoot from the camp in the plains to search for
his son and his elephant, and now that he had found them he looked at
them as though he were afraid of them both. And there was a feast by
the blazing campfires in front of the lines of picketed elephants,
and Little Toomai was the hero of it all. And the big brown elephant
catchers, the trackers and drivers and ropers, and the men who know all
the secrets of breaking the wildest elephants, passed him from one to
the other, and they marked his forehead with blood from the breast of a
newly killed jungle-cock, to show that he was a forester, initiated and
free of all the jungles.

And at last, when the flames died down, and the red light of the logs
made the elephants look as though they had been dipped in blood too,
Machua Appa, the head of all the drivers of all the Keddahs--Machua
Appa, Petersen Sahib's other self, who had never seen a made road in
forty years: Machua Appa, who was so great that he had no other name
than Machua Appa,--leaped to his feet, with Little Toomai held high in
the air above his head, and shouted: "Listen, my brothers. Listen, too,
you my lords in the lines there, for I, Machua Appa, am speaking! This
little one shall no more be called Little Toomai, but Toomai of the
Elephants, as his great-grandfather was called before him. What never
man has seen he has seen through the long night, and the favor of the
elephant-folk and of the Gods of the Jungles is with him. He shall
become a great tracker. He shall become greater than I, even I, Machua
Appa! He shall follow the new trail, and the stale trail, and the mixed
trail, with a clear eye! He shall take no harm in the Keddah when he
runs under their bellies to rope the wild tuskers; and if he slips
before the feet of the charging bull elephant, the bull elephant
shall know who he is and shall not crush him. Aihai! my lords in the
chains,"--he whirled up the line of pickets--"here is the little one
that has seen your dances in your hidden places,--the sight that never
man saw! Give him honor, my lords! Salaam karo, my children. Make your
salute to Toomai of the Elephants! Gunga Pershad, ahaa! Hira Guj, Birchi
Guj, Kuttar Guj, ahaa! Pudmini,--thou hast seen him at the dance, and
thou too, Kala Nag, my pearl among elephants!--ahaa! Together! To Toomai
of the Elephants. Barrao!"

And at that last wild yell the whole line flung up their trunks till the
tips touched their foreheads, and broke out into the full salute--the
crashing trumpet-peal that only the Viceroy of India hears, the Salaamut
of the Keddah.

But it was all for the sake of Little Toomai, who had seen what never
man had seen before--the dance of the elephants at night and alone in
the heart of the Garo hills!




Shiv and the Grasshopper

     (The song that Toomai's mother sang to the baby)

     Shiv, who poured the harvest and made the winds to blow,
     Sitting at the doorways of a day of long ago,
     Gave to each his portion, food and toil and fate,
     From the King upon the guddee to the Beggar at the gate.
        All things made he--Shiva the Preserver.
        Mahadeo!  Mahadeo!  He made all,--
        Thorn for the camel, fodder for the kine,
        And mother's heart for sleepy head, O little son of mine!


     Wheat he gave to rich folk, millet to the poor,
     Broken scraps for holy men that beg from door to door;
     Battle to the tiger, carrion to the kite,
     And rags and bones to wicked wolves without the wall at night.
     Naught he found too lofty, none he saw too low--
     Parbati beside him watched them come and go;
     Thought to cheat her husband, turning Shiv to jest--
     Stole the little grasshopper and hid it in her breast.
        So she tricked him, Shiva the Preserver.
        Mahadeo!  Mahadeo!  Turn and see.
        Tall are the camels, heavy are the kine,
        But this was Least of Little Things, O little son of mine!

     When the dole was ended, laughingly she said,
     "Master, of a million mouths, is not one unfed?"
     Laughing, Shiv made answer, "All have had their part,
     Even he, the little one, hidden 'neath thy heart."
     From her breast she plucked it, Parbati the thief,
     Saw the Least of Little Things gnawed a new-grown leaf!
     Saw and feared and wondered, making prayer to Shiv,
     Who hath surely given meat to all that live.
        All things made he--Shiva the Preserver.
        Mahadeo!  Mahadeo!  He made all,--
        Thorn for the camel, fodder for the kine,
        And mother's heart for sleepy head, O little son of mine!




Her Majesty's Servants

     You can work it out by Fractions or by simple Rule of Three,
     But the way of Tweedle-dum is not the way of Tweedle-dee.
     You can twist it, you can turn it, you can plait it till you drop,
     But the way of Pilly Winky's not the way of Winkie Pop!

It had been raining heavily for one whole month--raining on a camp
of thirty thousand men and thousands of camels, elephants, horses,
bullocks, and mules all gathered together at a place called Rawal Pindi,
to be reviewed by the Viceroy of India. He was receiving a visit from
the Amir of Afghanistan--a wild king of a very wild country. The Amir
had brought with him for a bodyguard eight hundred men and horses who
had never seen a camp or a locomotive before in their lives--savage
men and savage horses from somewhere at the back of Central Asia. Every
night a mob of these horses would be sure to break their heel ropes and
stampede up and down the camp through the mud in the dark, or the camels
would break loose and run about and fall over the ropes of the tents,
and you can imagine how pleasant that was for men trying to go to sleep.
My tent lay far away from the camel lines, and I thought it was safe.
But one night a man popped his head in and shouted, "Get out, quick!
They're coming! My tent's gone!"

I knew who "they" were, so I put on my boots and waterproof and scuttled
out into the slush. Little Vixen, my fox terrier, went out through the
other side; and then there was a roaring and a grunting and bubbling,
and I saw the tent cave in, as the pole snapped, and begin to dance
about like a mad ghost. A camel had blundered into it, and wet and angry
as I was, I could not help laughing. Then I ran on, because I did not
know how many camels might have got loose, and before long I was out of
sight of the camp, plowing my way through the mud.

At last I fell over the tail-end of a gun, and by that knew I was
somewhere near the artillery lines where the cannon were stacked at
night. As I did not want to plowter about any more in the drizzle and
the dark, I put my waterproof over the muzzle of one gun, and made a
sort of wigwam with two or three rammers that I found, and lay along the
tail of another gun, wondering where Vixen had got to, and where I might
be.

Just as I was getting ready to go to sleep I heard a jingle of harness
and a grunt, and a mule passed me shaking his wet ears. He belonged to
a screw-gun battery, for I could hear the rattle of the straps and rings
and chains and things on his saddle pad. The screw-guns are tiny little
cannon made in two pieces, that are screwed together when the time comes
to use them. They are taken up mountains, anywhere that a mule can find
a road, and they are very useful for fighting in rocky country.

Behind the mule there was a camel, with his big soft feet squelching
and slipping in the mud, and his neck bobbing to and fro like a
strayed hen's. Luckily, I knew enough of beast language--not wild-beast
language, but camp-beast language, of course--from the natives to know
what he was saying.

He must have been the one that flopped into my tent, for he called to
the mule, "What shall I do? Where shall I go? I have fought with a white
thing that waved, and it took a stick and hit me on the neck." (That was
my broken tent pole, and I was very glad to know it.) "Shall we run on?"

"Oh, it was you," said the mule, "you and your friends, that have
been disturbing the camp? All right. You'll be beaten for this in the
morning. But I may as well give you something on account now."

I heard the harness jingle as the mule backed and caught the camel
two kicks in the ribs that rang like a drum. "Another time," he said,
"you'll know better than to run through a mule battery at night,
shouting `Thieves and fire!' Sit down, and keep your silly neck quiet."

The camel doubled up camel-fashion, like a two-foot rule, and sat down
whimpering. There was a regular beat of hoofs in the darkness, and a big
troop-horse cantered up as steadily as though he were on parade, jumped
a gun tail, and landed close to the mule.

"It's disgraceful," he said, blowing out his nostrils. "Those camels
have racketed through our lines again--the third time this week. How's a
horse to keep his condition if he isn't allowed to sleep. Who's here?"

"I'm the breech-piece mule of number two gun of the First Screw
Battery," said the mule, "and the other's one of your friends. He's
waked me up too. Who are you?"

"Number Fifteen, E troop, Ninth Lancers--Dick Cunliffe's horse. Stand
over a little, there."

"Oh, beg your pardon," said the mule. "It's too dark to see much. Aren't
these camels too sickening for anything? I walked out of my lines to get
a little peace and quiet here."

"My lords," said the camel humbly, "we dreamed bad dreams in the night,
and we were very much afraid. I am only a baggage camel of the 39th
Native Infantry, and I am not as brave as you are, my lords."

"Then why didn't you stay and carry baggage for the 39th Native
Infantry, instead of running all round the camp?" said the mule.

"They were such very bad dreams," said the camel. "I am sorry. Listen!
What is that? Shall we run on again?"

"Sit down," said the mule, "or you'll snap your long stick-legs between
the guns." He cocked one ear and listened. "Bullocks!" he said. "Gun
bullocks. On my word, you and your friends have waked the camp very
thoroughly. It takes a good deal of prodding to put up a gun-bullock."

I heard a chain dragging along the ground, and a yoke of the great sulky
white bullocks that drag the heavy siege guns when the elephants won't
go any nearer to the firing, came shouldering along together. And almost
stepping on the chain was another battery mule, calling wildly for
"Billy."

"That's one of our recruits," said the old mule to the troop horse.
"He's calling for me. Here, youngster, stop squealing. The dark never
hurt anybody yet."

The gun-bullocks lay down together and began chewing the cud, but the
young mule huddled close to Billy.

"Things!" he said. "Fearful and horrible, Billy! They came into our
lines while we were asleep. D'you think they'll kill us?"

"I've a very great mind to give you a number-one kicking," said Billy.
"The idea of a fourteen-hand mule with your training disgracing the
battery before this gentleman!"

"Gently, gently!" said the troop-horse. "Remember they are always like
this to begin with. The first time I ever saw a man (it was in Australia
when I was a three-year-old) I ran for half a day, and if I'd seen a
camel, I should have been running still."

Nearly all our horses for the English cavalry are brought to India from
Australia, and are broken in by the troopers themselves.

"True enough," said Billy. "Stop shaking, youngster. The first time
they put the full harness with all its chains on my back I stood on
my forelegs and kicked every bit of it off. I hadn't learned the real
science of kicking then, but the battery said they had never seen
anything like it."

"But this wasn't harness or anything that jingled," said the young mule.
"You know I don't mind that now, Billy. It was Things like trees, and
they fell up and down the lines and bubbled; and my head-rope broke, and
I couldn't find my driver, and I couldn't find you, Billy, so I ran off
with--with these gentlemen."

"H'm!" said Billy. "As soon as I heard the camels were loose I came away
on my own account. When a battery--a screw-gun mule calls gun-bullocks
gentlemen, he must be very badly shaken up. Who are you fellows on the
ground there?"

The gun bullocks rolled their cuds, and answered both together: "The
seventh yoke of the first gun of the Big Gun Battery. We were asleep
when the camels came, but when we were trampled on we got up and walked
away. It is better to lie quiet in the mud than to be disturbed on good
bedding. We told your friend here that there was nothing to be afraid
of, but he knew so much that he thought otherwise. Wah!"

They went on chewing.

"That comes of being afraid," said Billy. "You get laughed at by
gun-bullocks. I hope you like it, young un."

The young mule's teeth snapped, and I heard him say something about not
being afraid of any beefy old bullock in the world. But the bullocks
only clicked their horns together and went on chewing.

"Now, don't be angry after you've been afraid. That's the worst kind
of cowardice," said the troop-horse. "Anybody can be forgiven for being
scared in the night, I think, if they see things they don't understand.
We've broken out of our pickets, again and again, four hundred and fifty
of us, just because a new recruit got to telling tales of whip snakes at
home in Australia till we were scared to death of the loose ends of our
head-ropes."

"That's all very well in camp," said Billy. "I'm not above stampeding
myself, for the fun of the thing, when I haven't been out for a day or
two. But what do you do on active service?"

"Oh, that's quite another set of new shoes," said the troop horse. "Dick
Cunliffe's on my back then, and drives his knees into me, and all I have
to do is to watch where I am putting my feet, and to keep my hind legs
well under me, and be bridle-wise."

"What's bridle-wise?" said the young mule.

"By the Blue Gums of the Back Blocks," snorted the troop-horse, "do you
mean to say that you aren't taught to be bridle-wise in your business?
How can you do anything, unless you can spin round at once when the
rein is pressed on your neck? It means life or death to your man, and of
course that's life and death to you. Get round with your hind legs under
you the instant you feel the rein on your neck. If you haven't room to
swing round, rear up a little and come round on your hind legs. That's
being bridle-wise."

"We aren't taught that way," said Billy the mule stiffly. "We're taught
to obey the man at our head: step off when he says so, and step in when
he says so. I suppose it comes to the same thing. Now, with all this
fine fancy business and rearing, which must be very bad for your hocks,
what do you do?"

"That depends," said the troop-horse. "Generally I have to go in among a
lot of yelling, hairy men with knives--long shiny knives, worse than
the farrier's knives--and I have to take care that Dick's boot is just
touching the next man's boot without crushing it. I can see Dick's lance
to the right of my right eye, and I know I'm safe. I shouldn't care to
be the man or horse that stood up to Dick and me when we're in a hurry."

"Don't the knives hurt?" said the young mule.

"Well, I got one cut across the chest once, but that wasn't Dick's
fault--"

"A lot I should have cared whose fault it was, if it hurt!" said the
young mule.

"You must," said the troop horse. "If you don't trust your man, you may
as well run away at once. That's what some of our horses do, and I don't
blame them. As I was saying, it wasn't Dick's fault. The man was lying
on the ground, and I stretched myself not to tread on him, and he
slashed up at me. Next time I have to go over a man lying down I shall
step on him--hard."

"H'm!" said Billy. "It sounds very foolish. Knives are dirty things
at any time. The proper thing to do is to climb up a mountain with a
well-balanced saddle, hang on by all four feet and your ears too, and
creep and crawl and wriggle along, till you come out hundreds of feet
above anyone else on a ledge where there's just room enough for your
hoofs. Then you stand still and keep quiet--never ask a man to hold your
head, young un--keep quiet while the guns are being put together, and
then you watch the little poppy shells drop down into the tree-tops ever
so far below."

"Don't you ever trip?" said the troop-horse.

"They say that when a mule trips you can split a hen's ear," said Billy.
"Now and again perhaps a badly packed saddle will upset a mule, but it's
very seldom. I wish I could show you our business. It's beautiful. Why,
it took me three years to find out what the men were driving at. The
science of the thing is never to show up against the sky line, because,
if you do, you may get fired at. Remember that, young un. Always keep
hidden as much as possible, even if you have to go a mile out of your
way. I lead the battery when it comes to that sort of climbing."

"Fired at without the chance of running into the people who are firing!"
said the troop-horse, thinking hard. "I couldn't stand that. I should
want to charge--with Dick."

"Oh, no, you wouldn't. You know that as soon as the guns are in
position they'll do all the charging. That's scientific and neat. But
knives--pah!"

The baggage-camel had been bobbing his head to and fro for some time
past, anxious to get a word in edgewise. Then I heard him say, as he
cleared his throat, nervously:

"I--I--I have fought a little, but not in that climbing way or that
running way."

"No. Now you mention it," said Billy, "you don't look as though you were
made for climbing or running--much. Well, how was it, old Hay-bales?"

"The proper way," said the camel. "We all sat down--"

"Oh, my crupper and breastplate!" said the troop-horse under his breath.
"Sat down!"

"We sat down--a hundred of us," the camel went on, "in a big square, and
the men piled our packs and saddles, outside the square, and they fired
over our backs, the men did, on all sides of the square."

"What sort of men? Any men that came along?" said the troop-horse. "They
teach us in riding school to lie down and let our masters fire across
us, but Dick Cunliffe is the only man I'd trust to do that. It tickles
my girths, and, besides, I can't see with my head on the ground."

"What does it matter who fires across you?" said the camel. "There are
plenty of men and plenty of other camels close by, and a great many
clouds of smoke. I am not frightened then. I sit still and wait."

"And yet," said Billy, "you dream bad dreams and upset the camp at
night. Well, well! Before I'd lie down, not to speak of sitting down,
and let a man fire across me, my heels and his head would have something
to say to each other. Did you ever hear anything so awful as that?"

There was a long silence, and then one of the gun bullocks lifted up his
big head and said, "This is very foolish indeed. There is only one way
of fighting."

"Oh, go on," said Billy. "Please don't mind me. I suppose you fellows
fight standing on your tails?"

"Only one way," said the two together. (They must have been twins.)
"This is that way. To put all twenty yoke of us to the big gun as soon
as Two Tails trumpets." ("Two Tails" is camp slang for the elephant.)

"What does Two Tails trumpet for?" said the young mule.

"To show that he is not going any nearer to the smoke on the other
side. Two Tails is a great coward. Then we tug the big gun all
together--Heya--Hullah! Heeyah! Hullah! We do not climb like cats nor
run like calves. We go across the level plain, twenty yoke of us, till
we are unyoked again, and we graze while the big guns talk across the
plain to some town with mud walls, and pieces of the wall fall out, and
the dust goes up as though many cattle were coming home."

"Oh! And you choose that time for grazing?" said the young mule.

"That time or any other. Eating is always good. We eat till we are yoked
up again and tug the gun back to where Two Tails is waiting for it.
Sometimes there are big guns in the city that speak back, and some of
us are killed, and then there is all the more grazing for those that are
left. This is Fate. None the less, Two Tails is a great coward. That is
the proper way to fight. We are brothers from Hapur. Our father was a
sacred bull of Shiva. We have spoken."

"Well, I've certainly learned something tonight," said the troop-horse.
"Do you gentlemen of the screw-gun battery feel inclined to eat when you
are being fired at with big guns, and Two Tails is behind you?"

"About as much as we feel inclined to sit down and let men sprawl all
over us, or run into people with knives. I never heard such stuff. A
mountain ledge, a well-balanced load, a driver you can trust to let you
pick your own way, and I'm your mule. But--the other things--no!" said
Billy, with a stamp of his foot.

"Of course," said the troop horse, "everyone is not made in the same
way, and I can quite see that your family, on your father's side, would
fail to understand a great many things."

"Never you mind my family on my father's side," said Billy angrily, for
every mule hates to be reminded that his father was a donkey. "My father
was a Southern gentleman, and he could pull down and bite and kick into
rags every horse he came across. Remember that, you big brown Brumby!"

Brumby means wild horse without any breeding. Imagine the feelings of
Sunol if a car-horse called her a "skate," and you can imagine how the
Australian horse felt. I saw the white of his eye glitter in the dark.

"See here, you son of an imported Malaga jackass," he said between
his teeth, "I'd have you know that I'm related on my mother's side to
Carbine, winner of the Melbourne Cup, and where I come from we aren't
accustomed to being ridden over roughshod by any parrot-mouthed,
pig-headed mule in a pop-gun pea-shooter battery. Are you ready?"

"On your hind legs!" squealed Billy. They both reared up facing each
other, and I was expecting a furious fight, when a gurgly, rumbly
voice, called out of the darkness to the right--"Children, what are you
fighting about there? Be quiet."

Both beasts dropped down with a snort of disgust, for neither horse nor
mule can bear to listen to an elephant's voice.

"It's Two Tails!" said the troop-horse. "I can't stand him. A tail at
each end isn't fair!"

"My feelings exactly," said Billy, crowding into the troop-horse for
company. "We're very alike in some things."

"I suppose we've inherited them from our mothers," said the troop horse.
"It's not worth quarreling about. Hi! Two Tails, are you tied up?"

"Yes," said Two Tails, with a laugh all up his trunk. "I'm picketed for
the night. I've heard what you fellows have been saying. But don't be
afraid. I'm not coming over."

The bullocks and the camel said, half aloud, "Afraid of Two Tails--what
nonsense!" And the bullocks went on, "We are sorry that you heard, but
it is true. Two Tails, why are you afraid of the guns when they fire?"

"Well," said Two Tails, rubbing one hind leg against the other, exactly
like a little boy saying a poem, "I don't quite know whether you'd
understand."

"We don't, but we have to pull the guns," said the bullocks.

"I know it, and I know you are a good deal braver than you think
you are. But it's different with me. My battery captain called me a
Pachydermatous Anachronism the other day."

"That's another way of fighting, I suppose?" said Billy, who was
recovering his spirits.

"You don't know what that means, of course, but I do. It means betwixt
and between, and that is just where I am. I can see inside my head what
will happen when a shell bursts, and you bullocks can't."

"I can," said the troop-horse. "At least a little bit. I try not to
think about it."

"I can see more than you, and I do think about it. I know there's a
great deal of me to take care of, and I know that nobody knows how to
cure me when I'm sick. All they can do is to stop my driver's pay till I
get well, and I can't trust my driver."

"Ah!" said the troop horse. "That explains it. I can trust Dick."

"You could put a whole regiment of Dicks on my back without making me
feel any better. I know just enough to be uncomfortable, and not enough
to go on in spite of it."

"We do not understand," said the bullocks.

"I know you don't. I'm not talking to you. You don't know what blood
is."

"We do," said the bullocks. "It is red stuff that soaks into the ground
and smells."

The troop-horse gave a kick and a bound and a snort.

"Don't talk of it," he said. "I can smell it now, just thinking of it.
It makes me want to run--when I haven't Dick on my back."

"But it is not here," said the camel and the bullocks. "Why are you so
stupid?"

"It's vile stuff," said Billy. "I don't want to run, but I don't want to
talk about it."

"There you are!" said Two Tails, waving his tail to explain.

"Surely. Yes, we have been here all night," said the bullocks.

Two Tails stamped his foot till the iron ring on it jingled. "Oh, I'm
not talking to you. You can't see inside your heads."

"No. We see out of our four eyes," said the bullocks. "We see straight
in front of us."

"If I could do that and nothing else, you wouldn't be needed to pull the
big guns at all. If I was like my captain--he can see things inside his
head before the firing begins, and he shakes all over, but he knows too
much to run away--if I was like him I could pull the guns. But if I were
as wise as all that I should never be here. I should be a king in the
forest, as I used to be, sleeping half the day and bathing when I liked.
I haven't had a good bath for a month."

"That's all very fine," said Billy. "But giving a thing a long name
doesn't make it any better."

"H'sh!" said the troop horse. "I think I understand what Two Tails
means."

"You'll understand better in a minute," said Two Tails angrily. "Now you
just explain to me why you don't like this!"

He began trumpeting furiously at the top of his trumpet.

"Stop that!" said Billy and the troop horse together, and I could
hear them stamp and shiver. An elephant's trumpeting is always nasty,
especially on a dark night.

"I shan't stop," said Two Tails. "Won't you explain that, please?
Hhrrmph! Rrrt! Rrrmph! Rrrhha!" Then he stopped suddenly, and I heard
a little whimper in the dark, and knew that Vixen had found me at last.
She knew as well as I did that if there is one thing in the world the
elephant is more afraid of than another it is a little barking dog. So
she stopped to bully Two Tails in his pickets, and yapped round his big
feet. Two Tails shuffled and squeaked. "Go away, little dog!" he said.
"Don't snuff at my ankles, or I'll kick at you. Good little dog--nice
little doggie, then! Go home, you yelping little beast! Oh, why doesn't
someone take her away? She'll bite me in a minute."

"Seems to me," said Billy to the troop horse, "that our friend Two Tails
is afraid of most things. Now, if I had a full meal for every dog I've
kicked across the parade-ground I should be as fat as Two Tails nearly."

I whistled, and Vixen ran up to me, muddy all over, and licked my nose,
and told me a long tale about hunting for me all through the camp. I
never let her know that I understood beast talk, or she would have
taken all sorts of liberties. So I buttoned her into the breast of my
overcoat, and Two Tails shuffled and stamped and growled to himself.

"Extraordinary! Most extraordinary!" he said. "It runs in our family.
Now, where has that nasty little beast gone to?"

I heard him feeling about with his trunk.

"We all seem to be affected in various ways," he went on, blowing his
nose. "Now, you gentlemen were alarmed, I believe, when I trumpeted."

"Not alarmed, exactly," said the troop-horse, "but it made me feel as
though I had hornets where my saddle ought to be. Don't begin again."

"I'm frightened of a little dog, and the camel here is frightened by bad
dreams in the night."

"It is very lucky for us that we haven't all got to fight in the same
way," said the troop-horse.

"What I want to know," said the young mule, who had been quiet for a
long time--"what I want to know is, why we have to fight at all."

"Because we're told to," said the troop-horse, with a snort of contempt.

"Orders," said Billy the mule, and his teeth snapped.

"Hukm hai!" (It is an order!), said the camel with a gurgle, and Two
Tails and the bullocks repeated, "Hukm hai!"

"Yes, but who gives the orders?" said the recruit-mule.

"The man who walks at your head--Or sits on your back--Or holds the nose
rope--Or twists your tail," said Billy and the troop-horse and the camel
and the bullocks one after the other.

"But who gives them the orders?"

"Now you want to know too much, young un," said Billy, "and that is one
way of getting kicked. All you have to do is to obey the man at your
head and ask no questions."

"He's quite right," said Two Tails. "I can't always obey, because I'm
betwixt and between. But Billy's right. Obey the man next to you who
gives the order, or you'll stop all the battery, besides getting a
thrashing."

The gun-bullocks got up to go. "Morning is coming," they said. "We will
go back to our lines. It is true that we only see out of our eyes, and
we are not very clever. But still, we are the only people to-night who
have not been afraid. Good-night, you brave people."

Nobody answered, and the troop-horse said, to change the conversation,
"Where's that little dog? A dog means a man somewhere about."

"Here I am," yapped Vixen, "under the gun tail with my man. You big,
blundering beast of a camel you, you upset our tent. My man's very
angry."

"Phew!" said the bullocks. "He must be white!"

"Of course he is," said Vixen. "Do you suppose I'm looked after by a
black bullock-driver?"

"Huah! Ouach! Ugh!" said the bullocks. "Let us get away quickly."

They plunged forward in the mud, and managed somehow to run their yoke
on the pole of an ammunition wagon, where it jammed.

"Now you have done it," said Billy calmly. "Don't struggle. You're hung
up till daylight. What on earth's the matter?"

The bullocks went off into the long hissing snorts that Indian cattle
give, and pushed and crowded and slued and stamped and slipped and
nearly fell down in the mud, grunting savagely.

"You'll break your necks in a minute," said the troop-horse. "What's the
matter with white men? I live with 'em."

"They--eat--us! Pull!" said the near bullock. The yoke snapped with a
twang, and they lumbered off together.

I never knew before what made Indian cattle so scared of Englishmen.
We eat beef--a thing that no cattle-driver touches--and of course the
cattle do not like it.

"May I be flogged with my own pad-chains! Who'd have thought of two big
lumps like those losing their heads?" said Billy.

"Never mind. I'm going to look at this man. Most of the white men, I
know, have things in their pockets," said the troop-horse.

"I'll leave you, then. I can't say I'm over-fond of 'em myself. Besides,
white men who haven't a place to sleep in are more than likely to be
thieves, and I've a good deal of Government property on my back. Come
along, young un, and we'll go back to our lines. Good-night, Australia!
See you on parade to-morrow, I suppose. Good-night, old Hay-bale!--try
to control your feelings, won't you? Good-night, Two Tails! If you pass
us on the ground tomorrow, don't trumpet. It spoils our formation."

Billy the Mule stumped off with the swaggering limp of an old
campaigner, as the troop-horse's head came nuzzling into my breast, and
I gave him biscuits, while Vixen, who is a most conceited little dog,
told him fibs about the scores of horses that she and I kept.

"I'm coming to the parade to-morrow in my dog-cart," she said. "Where
will you be?"

"On the left hand of the second squadron. I set the time for all my
troop, little lady," he said politely. "Now I must go back to Dick. My
tail's all muddy, and he'll have two hours' hard work dressing me for
parade."

The big parade of all the thirty thousand men was held that afternoon,
and Vixen and I had a good place close to the Viceroy and the Amir of
Afghanistan, with high, big black hat of astrakhan wool and the great
diamond star in the center. The first part of the review was all
sunshine, and the regiments went by in wave upon wave of legs all moving
together, and guns all in a line, till our eyes grew dizzy. Then the
cavalry came up, to the beautiful cavalry canter of "Bonnie Dundee," and
Vixen cocked her ear where she sat on the dog-cart. The second squadron
of the Lancers shot by, and there was the troop-horse, with his tail
like spun silk, his head pulled into his breast, one ear forward and one
back, setting the time for all his squadron, his legs going as smoothly
as waltz music. Then the big guns came by, and I saw Two Tails and two
other elephants harnessed in line to a forty-pounder siege gun, while
twenty yoke of oxen walked behind. The seventh pair had a new yoke, and
they looked rather stiff and tired. Last came the screw guns, and Billy
the mule carried himself as though he commanded all the troops, and his
harness was oiled and polished till it winked. I gave a cheer all by
myself for Billy the mule, but he never looked right or left.

The rain began to fall again, and for a while it was too misty to see
what the troops were doing. They had made a big half circle across the
plain, and were spreading out into a line. That line grew and grew and
grew till it was three-quarters of a mile long from wing to wing--one
solid wall of men, horses, and guns. Then it came on straight toward the
Viceroy and the Amir, and as it got nearer the ground began to shake,
like the deck of a steamer when the engines are going fast.

Unless you have been there you cannot imagine what a frightening effect
this steady come-down of troops has on the spectators, even when they
know it is only a review. I looked at the Amir. Up till then he had not
shown the shadow of a sign of astonishment or anything else. But now his
eyes began to get bigger and bigger, and he picked up the reins on his
horse's neck and looked behind him. For a minute it seemed as though he
were going to draw his sword and slash his way out through the English
men and women in the carriages at the back. Then the advance stopped
dead, the ground stood still, the whole line saluted, and thirty bands
began to play all together. That was the end of the review, and the
regiments went off to their camps in the rain, and an infantry band
struck up with--

     The animals went in two by two,
          Hurrah!
     The animals went in two by two,
     The elephant and the battery mul',
     and they all got into the Ark
          For to get out of the rain!

Then I heard an old grizzled, long-haired Central Asian chief, who had
come down with the Amir, asking questions of a native officer.

"Now," said he, "in what manner was this wonderful thing done?"

And the officer answered, "An order was given, and they obeyed."

"But are the beasts as wise as the men?" said the chief.

"They obey, as the men do. Mule, horse, elephant, or bullock, he
obeys his driver, and the driver his sergeant, and the sergeant his
lieutenant, and the lieutenant his captain, and the captain his major,
and the major his colonel, and the colonel his brigadier commanding
three regiments, and the brigadier the general, who obeys the Viceroy,
who is the servant of the Empress. Thus it is done."

"Would it were so in Afghanistan!" said the chief, "for there we obey
only our own wills."

"And for that reason," said the native officer, twirling his mustache,
"your Amir whom you do not obey must come here and take orders from our
Viceroy."




Parade Song of the Camp Animals

     ELEPHANTS OF THE GUN TEAMS

     We lent to Alexander the strength of Hercules,
     The wisdom of our foreheads, the cunning of our knees;
     We bowed our necks to service: they ne'er were loosed again,--
     Make way there--way for the ten-foot teams
           Of the Forty-Pounder train!

     GUN BULLOCKS

     Those heroes in their harnesses avoid a cannon-ball,
     And what they know of powder upsets them one and all;
     Then we come into action and tug the guns again--
     Make way there--way for the twenty yoke
           Of the Forty-Pounder train!

     CAVALRY HORSES

     By the brand on my shoulder, the finest of tunes
     Is played by the Lancers, Hussars, and Dragoons,
     And it's sweeter than "Stables" or "Water" to me--
     The Cavalry Canter of "Bonnie Dundee"!

     Then feed us and break us and handle and groom,
     And give us good riders and plenty of room,
     And launch us in column of squadron and see
     The way of the war-horse to "Bonnie Dundee"!

     SCREW-GUN MULES

     As me and my companions were scrambling up a hill,
     The path was lost in rolling stones, but we went forward still;
     For we can wriggle and climb, my lads, and turn up everywhere,
     Oh, it's our delight on a mountain height, with a leg or two to
        spare!

     Good luck to every sergeant, then, that lets us pick our road;
     Bad luck to all the driver-men that cannot pack a load:
     For we can wriggle and climb, my lads, and turn up everywhere,
     Oh, it's our delight on a mountain height, with a leg or two to
        spare!

     COMMISSARIAT CAMELS

     We haven't a camelty tune of our own
     To help us trollop along,
     But every neck is a hair trombone
     (Rtt-ta-ta-ta! is a hair trombone!)
     And this our marching-song:
     Can't!  Don't!  Shan't!  Won't!
     Pass it along the line!
     Somebody's pack has slid from his back,
     Wish it were only mine!
     Somebody's load has tipped off in the road--
     Cheer for a halt and a row!
     Urrr!  Yarrh!  Grr!  Arrh!
     Somebody's catching it now!

     ALL THE BEASTS TOGETHER

     Children of the Camp are we,
     Serving each in his degree;
     Children of the yoke and goad,
     Pack and harness, pad and load.
     See our line across the plain,
     Like a heel-rope bent again,
     Reaching, writhing, rolling far,
     Sweeping all away to war!
     While the men that walk beside,
     Dusty, silent, heavy-eyed,
     Cannot tell why we or they
     March and suffer day by day.
        Children of the Camp are we,
        Serving each in his degree;
        Children of the yoke and goad,
        Pack and harness, pad and load!

Ñêà÷àíî ñ ñàéòà www.HomeEnglish.ru

DRACULA

by

Bram Stoker


1897 edition





CHAPTER 1


Jonathan Harker's Journal




3 May. Bistritz. Left Munich at 8:35 P.M., on 1st May,
arriving at Vienna early next morning; should have arrived
at 6:46, but train was an hour late. Buda-Pesth seems a won-
derful place, from the glimpse which I got of it from the
train and the little I could walk through the streets. I
feared to go very far from the station, as we had arrived
late and would start as near the correct time as possible.

The impression I had was that we were leaving the West
and entering the East; the most western of splendid bridges
over the Danube, which is here of noble width and depth,
took us among the traditions of Turkish rule.

We left in pretty good time, and came after nightfall
to Klausenburgh. Here I stopped for the night at the Hotel
Royale. I had for dinner, or rather supper, a chicken done
up some way with red pepper, which was very good but thirsty.
(Mem. get recipe for Mina.) I asked the waiter, and he said
it was called "paprika hendl," and that, as it was a nation-
al dish, I should be able to get it anywhere along the Car-
pathians.

I found my smattering of German very useful here, in-
deed, I don't know how I should be able to get on without
it.

Having had some time at my disposal when in London, I
had visited the British Museum, and made search among the
books and maps in the library regarding Transylvania; it
had struck me that some foreknowledge of the country could
hardly fail to have some importance in dealing with a
nobleman of that country.


I find that the district he named is in the extreme
east of the country, just on the borders of three states,
Transylvania, Moldavia, and Bukovina, in the midst of the
Carpathian mountains; one of the wildest and least known
portions of Europe.

I was not able to light on any map or work giving the
exact locality of the Castle Dracula, as there are no maps
of this country as yet to compare with our own Ordance
Survey Maps; but I found that Bistritz, the post town named
by Count Dracula, is a fairly well-known place. I shall
enter here some of my notes, as they may refresh my memory
when I talk over my travels with Mina.

In the population of Transylvania there are four dis-
tinct nationalities: Saxons in the South, and mixed with
them the Wallachs, who are the descendants of the Dacians;
Magyars in the West, and Szekelys in the East and North. I
am going among the latter, who claim to be descended from
Attila and the Huns. This may be so, for when the Magyars
conquered the country in the eleventh century they found
the Huns settled in it.

I read that every known superstition in the world is
gathered into the horseshoe of the Carpathians, as if it
were the centre of some sort of imaginative whirlpool; if
so my stay may be very interesting. (Mem., I must ask the
Count all about them.)

I did not sleep well, though my bed was comfortable
enough, for I had all sorts of queer dreams. There was
a dog howling all night under my window, which may have
had something to do with it; or it may have been the
paprika, for I had to drink up all the water in my car-
afe, and was still thirsty. Towards morning I slept
and was wakened by the continuous knocking at my door,
so I guess I must have been sleeping soundly then.

I had for breakfast more paprika, and a sort of
porridge of maize flour which they said was "mamaliga",
and egg-plant stuffed with forcemeat, a very excellent
dish, which they call "impletata". (Mem., get recipe for this
also.)

I had to hurry breakfast, for the train started a
little before eight, or rather it ought to have done so,
for after rushing to the station at 7:30 I had to sit in
the carriage for more than an hour before we began to move.

It seems to me that the further east you go the more
unpunctual are the trains. What ought they to be in China?

All day long we seemed to dawdle through a country
which was full of beauty of every kind. Sometimes we saw
little towns or castles on the top of steep hills such as we
see in old missals; sometimes we ran by rivers and streams
which seemed from the wide stony margin on each side of them
to be subject ot great floods. It takes a lot of water, and
running strong, to sweep the outside edge of a river clear.

At every station there were groups of people, sometimes
crowds, and in all sorts of attire. Some of them were just
like the peasants at home or those I saw coming through
France and Germany, with short jackets, and round hats, and
home-made trousers; but others were very picturesque.

The women looked pretty, except when you got near them,
but they were very clumsy about the waist. They had all
full white sleeves of some kind or other, and most of them
had big belts with a lot of strips of something fluttering
from them like the dresses in a ballet, but of course there
were petticoats under them.

The strangest figures we saw were the Slovaks, who
were more barbarian than the rest, with their big cow-boy
hats, great baggy dirty-white trousers, white linen shirts,
and enormous heavy leather belts, nearly a foot wide, all
studded over with brass nails. They wore high boots, with
their trousers tucked into them, and had long black hair
and heavy black moustaches. They are very picturesque,
but do not look prepossessing. On the stage they would
be set down at once as some old Oriental band of brigands.
They are, however, I am told, very harmless and rather
wanting in natural self-assertion.

It was on the dark side of twilight when we got to
Bistritz, which is a very interesting old place. Being
practically on the frontier--for the Borgo Pass leads from
it into Bukovina--it has had a very stormy existence, and
it certainly shows marks of it. Fifty years ago a series
of great fires took place, which made terrible havoc on
five separate occasions. At the very beginning of the
seventeenth century it underwent a siege of three weeks
and lost 13,000 people, the casualties of war proper be-
ing assisted by famine and disease.

Count Dracula had directed me to go to the Golden
Krone Hotel, which I found, to my great delight, to be
thoroughly old-fashioned, for of course I wanted to see all
I could of the ways of the country.

I was evidently expected, for when I got near the
door I faced a cheery-looking elderly woman in the usual
peasant dress--white undergarment with a long double apron,
front, and back, of coloured stuff fitting almost too tight
for modesty. When I came close she bowed and said, "The
Herr Englishman?"

"Yes," I said, "Jonathan Harker."

She smiled, and gave some message to an elderly man in
white shirt-sleeves, who had followed her to the door.

He went, but immediately returned with a letter:


"My friend.--Welcome to the Carpathians. I am anxious-
ly expecting you. Sleep well tonight. At three tomorrow
the diligence will start for Bukovina; a place on it is kept
for you. At the Borgo Pass my carriage will await you and
will bring you to me. I trust that your journey from London
has been a happy one, and that you will enjoy your stay in
my beautiful land.--Your friend, Dracula."


4 May--I found that my landlord had got a letter from
the Count, directing him to secure the best place on the
coach for me; but on making inquiries as to details he seem-
ed somewhat reticent, and pretended that he could not under-
stand my German.

This could not be true, because up to then he had under-
stood it perfectly; at least, he answered my questions
exactly as if he did.

He and his wife, the old lady who had received me, look-
ed at each other in a frightened sort of way. He mumbled out
that the money had been sent in a letter,and that was all he
knew. When I asked him if he knew Count Dracula, and could
tell me anything of his castle, both he and his wife crossed
themselves, and, saying that they knew nothing at all, simply
refused to speak further. It was so near the time of start-
ing that I had no time to ask anyone else, for it was all
very mysterious and not by any means comforting.

Just before I was leaving, the old lady came up to my
room and said in a hysterical way: "Must you go? Oh! Young
Herr, must you go?" She was in such an excited state that
she seemed to have lost her grip of what German she knew,
and mixed it all up with some other language which I did
not know at all. I was just able to follow her by asking
many questions. When I told her that I must go at once, and
that I was engaged on important business, she asked again:

"Do you know what day it is?" I answered that it was
the fourth of May. She shook her head as she said again:

"Oh, yes! I know that! I know that, but do you know
what day it is?"

On my saying that I did not understand, she went on:

"It is the eve of St. George's Day. Do you not know
that to-night, when the clock strikes midnight, all the
evil things in the world will have full sway? Do you know
where you are going, and what you are going to?" She was
in such evident distress that I tried to comfort her, but
without effect. Finally, she went down on her knees and
implored me not to go; at least to wait a day or two be-
fore starting.

It was all very ridiculous but I did not feel com-
fortable. However, there was business to be done, and I
could allow nothing to interfere with it.

I tried to raise her up, and said, as gravely as I
could, that I thanked her, but my duty was imperative, and
that I must go.

She then rose and dried her eyes, and taking a cruci-
fix from her neck offered it to me.

I did not know what to do, for, as an English Church-
man, I have been taught to regard such things as in some
measure idolatrous, and yet it seemed so ungracious to re-
fuse an old lady meaning so well and in such a state of
mind.

She saw, I suppose, the doubt in my face, for she put
the rosary round my neck and said, "For your mother's sake,"
and went out of the room.

I am writing up this part of the diary whilst I am
waiting for the coach, which is, of course, late; and the
crucifix is still round my neck.

Whether it is the old lady's fear, or the many ghostly
traditions of this place, or the crucifix itself, I do not
know, but I am not feeling nearly as easy in my mind as
usual.

If this book should ever reach Mina before I do, let
it bring my good-bye. Here comes the coach!


5 May. The Castle.--The gray of the morning has passed,
and the sun is high over the distant horizon, which seems
jagged, whether with trees or hills I know not, for it is
so far off that big things and little are mixed.

I am not sleepy, and, as I am not to be called till I
awake, naturally I write till sleep comes.

There are many odd things to put down, and, lest who
reads them may fancy that I dined too well before I left
Bistritz, let me put down my dinner exactly.

I dined on what they called "robber steak"--bits of
bacon, onion, and beef, seasoned with red pepper, and
strung on sticks, and roasted over the fire, in simple style
of the London cat's meat!

The wine was Golden Mediasch, which produces a queer
sting on the tongue, which is, however, not disagreeable.

I had only a couple of glasses of this, and nothing
else.

When I got on the coach, the driver had not taken his
seat, and I saw him talking to the landlady.

They were evidently talking of me, for every now and
then they looked at me, and some of the people who were
sitting on the bench outside the door--came and listened,
and then looked at me, most of them pityingly. I could hear
a lot of words often repeated, queer words, for there were
many nationalities in the crowd, so I quietly got my polyglot
dictionary from my bag and looked them out.

I must say they were not cheering to me, for amongst
them were "Ordog"--Satan, "Pokol"--hell, "stregoica"--witch,
"vrolok" and "vlkoslak"--both mean the same thing, one being
Slovak and the other Servian for something that is either
werewolf or vampire. (Mem., I must ask the Count about these
superstitions.)

When we started, the crowd round the inn door, which
had by this time swelled to a considerable size, all made
the sign of the cross and pointed two fingers towards me.

With some difficulty, I got a fellow passenger to tell
me what they meant. He would not answer at first, but on
learning that I was English, he explained that it was a
charm or guard against the evil eye.

This was not very pleasant for me, just starting for an
unknown place to meet an unknown man. But everyone seemed
so kind-hearted, and so sorrowful, and so sympathetic that I
could not but be touched.

I shall never forget the last glimpse which I had of
the inn yard and its crowd of picturesque figures,all cross-
ing themselves, as they stood round the wide archway, with
its background of rich foliage of oleander and orange trees
in green tubs clustered in the centre of the yard.

Then our driver, whose wide linen drawers covered the
whole front of the boxseat,--"gotza" they call them--cracked
his big whip over his four small horses, which ran abreast,
and we set off on our journey.

I soon lost sight and recollection of ghostly fears in
the beauty of the scene as we drove along, although had I
known the language, or rather languages, which my fellow-
passengers were speaking, I might not have been able to
throw them off so easily. Before us lay a green sloping
land full of forests and woods, with here and there steep
hills, crowned with clumps of trees or with farmhouses, the
blank gable end to the road. There was everywhere a bewild-
ering mass of fruit blossom--apple, plum, pear, cherry. And
as we drove by I could see the green grass under the trees
spangled with the fallen petals. In and out amongst these
green hills of what they call here the "Mittel Land" ran the
road, losing itself as it swept round the grassy curve, or
was shut out by the straggling ends of pine woods, which
here and there ran down the hillsides like tongues of flame.
The road was rugged, but still we seemed to fly over it with
a feverish haste. I could not understand then what the haste
meant, but the driver was evidently bent on losing no time
in reaching Borgo Prund. I was told that this road is in
summertime excellent, but that it had not yet been put in
order after the winter snows. In this respect it is differ-
ent from the general run of roads in the Carpathians, for it
is an old tradition that they are not to be kept in too good
order. Of old the Hospadars would not repair them, lest the
Turk should think that they were preparing to bring in for-
eign troops, and so hasten the war which was always really
at loading point.

Beyond the green swelling hills of the Mittel Land rose
mighty slopes of forest up to the lofty steeps of the Car-
pathians themselves. Right and left of us they towered, with
the afternoon sun falling full upon them and bringing out
all the glorious colours of this beautiful range, deep blue
and purple in the shadows of the peaks, green and brown where
grass and rock mingled, and an endless perspective of jagged
rock and pointed crags, till these were themselves lost in
the distance, where the snowy peaks rose grandly. Here and
there seemed mighty rifts in the mountains, through which,
as the sun began to sink, we saw now and again the white
gleam of falling water. One of my companions touched my arm
as we swept round the base of a hill and opened up the lofty,
snow-covered peak of a mountain, which seemed, as we wound on
our serpentine way, to be right before us.

"Look! Isten szek!"--"God's seat!"--and he crossed him-
self reverently.

As we wound on our endless way, and the sun sank lower
and lower behind us, the shadows of the evening began to
creep round us. This was emphasized by the fact that the
snowy mountain-top still held the sunset, and seemed to glow
out with a delicate cool pink. Here and there we passed
Cszeks and slovaks, all in picturesque attire, but I noticed
that goitre was painfully prevalent. By the roadside were
many crosses, and as we swept by, my companions all crossed
themselves. Here and there was a peasant man or woman kneel-
ing before a shrine, who did not even turn round as we
approached, but seemed in the self-surrender of devotion to
have neither eyes nor ears for the outer world. There were
many things new to me. For instance, hay-ricks in the trees,
and here and there very beautiful masses of weeping birch,
their white stems shining like silver through the delicate
green of the leaves.

Now and again we passed a leiter-wagon--the ordinary
peasants's cart--with its long, snakelike vertebra, calcu-
lated to suit the inequalities of the road. On this were
sure to be seated quite a group of homecoming peasants, the
Cszeks with their white, and the Slovaks with their coloured
sheepskins, the latter carrying lance-fashion their long
staves, with axe at end. As the evening fell it began to get
very cold, and the growing twilight seemed to merge into one
dark mistiness the gloom of the trees, oak, beech, and pine,
though in the valleys which ran deep between the spurs of
the hills, as we ascended through the Pass, the dark firs
stood out here and there against the background of late-
lying snow. Sometimes, as the road was cut through the pine
woods that seemed in the darkness to be closing down upon
us, great masses of greyness which here and there bestrewed
the trees, produced a peculiarly weird and solemn effect,
which carried on the thoughts and grim fancies engendered
earlier in the evening, when the falling sunset threw into
strange relief the ghost-like clouds which amongst the
Carpathians seem to wind ceaselessly through the valleys.
Sometimes the hills were so steep that, despite our driver's
haste, the horses could only go slowly. I wished to get down
and walk up them, as we do at home, but the driver would not
hear of it. "No, no," he said. "You must not walk here. The
dogs are too fierce." And then he added, with what he evi-
dently meant for grim pleasantry--for he looked round to
catch the approving smile of the rest--"And you may have
enough of such matters before you go to sleep." The only
stop he would make was a moment's pause to light his lamps.

When it grew dark there seemed to be some excitement
amongst the passengers, and they kept speaking to him, one
after the other, as though urging him to further speed. He
lashed the horses unmercifully with his long whip, and with
wild cries of encouragement urged them on to further
exertions. Then through the darkness I could see a sort of
patch of grey light ahead of us,as though there were a cleft
in the hills. The excitement of the passengers grew greater.
The crazy coach rocked on its great leather springs, and
swayed like a boat tossed on a stormy sea. I had to hold on.
The road grew more level, and we appeared to fly along. Then
the mountains seemed to come nearer to us on each side and
to frown down upon us. We were entering on the Borgo Pass.
One by one several of the passengers offered me gifts, which
they pressed upon me with an earnestness which would take no
denial. These were certainly of an odd and varied kind, but
each was given in simple good faith, with a kindly word, and
a blessing, and that same strange mixture of fear-meaning
movements which I had seen outside the hotel at Bistritz--
the sign of the cross and the guard against the evil eye.
Then, as we flew along, the driver leaned forward, and on
each side the passengers, craning over the edge of the coach,
peered eagerly into the darkness. It was evident that some-
thing very exciting was either happening or expected, but
though I asked each passenger, no one would give me the
slightest explanation. This state of excitement kept on for
some little time. And at last we saw before us the Pass
opening out on the eastern side. There were dark, rolling
clouds overhead, and in the air the heavy, oppressive sense
of thunder. It seemed as though the mountain range had sepa-
rated two atmospheres, and that now we had got into the
thunderous one. I was now myself looking out for the convey-
ance which was to take me to the Count. Each moment I
expected to see the glare of lamps through the blackness, but
all was dark. The only light was the flickering rays of our
own lamps, in which the steam from our hard-driven horses
rose in a white cloud. We could see now the sandy road lying
white before us, but there was on it no sign of a vehicle.
The passengers drew back with a sigh of gladness, which
seemed to mock my own disappointment. I was already thinking
what I had best do, when the driver, looking at his watch,
said to the others something which I could hardly hear, it
was spoken so quietly and in so low a tone, I thought it was
"An hour less than the time." Then turning to me, he spoke
in German worse than my own.

"There is no carriage here. The Herr is not expected
after all. He will now come on to Bukovina, and return tomor-
row or the next day, better the next day." Whilst he was
speaking the horses began to neigh and snort and plunge
wildly, so that the driver had to hold them up. Then, amongst
a chorus of screams from the peasants and a universal cross-
ing of themselves, a caleche, with four horses, drove up be-
hind us, overtook us, and drew up beside the coach. I could
see from the flash of our lamps as the rays fell on them,
that the horses were coal-black and splendid animals. They
were driven by a tall man, with a long brown beard and a
great black hat, which seemed to hide his face from us. I
could only see the gleam of a pair of very bright eyes, which
seemed red in the lamplight, as he turned to us.

He said to the driver, "You are early tonight, my
friend."

The man stammered in reply, "The English Herr was in
a hurry."

To which the stranger replied, "That is why, I suppose,
you wished him to go on to Bukovina. You cannot deceive me,
my friend. I know too much, and my horses are swift."

As he spoke he smiled,and the lamplight fell on a hard-
looking mouth, with very red lips and sharp-looking teeth,
as white as ivory. One of my companions whispered to another
the line from Burger's "Lenore".

"Denn die Todten reiten Schnell."
("For the dead travel fast.")


The strange driver evidently heard the words, for he
looked up with a gleaming smile. The passenger turned his
face away, at the same time putting out his two fingers and
crossing himself. "Give me the Herr's luggage," said the
driver, and with exceeding alacrity my bags were handed out
and put in the caleche. Then I descended from the side of
the coach, as the caleche was close alongside, the driver
helping me with a hand which caught my arm in a grip of
steel. His strength must have been prodigious.

Without a word he shook his reins, the horses turned,
and we swept into the darkness of the pass. As I looked back
I saw the steam from the horses of the coach by the light
of the lamps,and projected against it the figures of my late
companions crossing themselves. Then the driver cracked his
whip and called to his horses, and off they swept on their
way to Bukovina. As they sank into the darkness I felt a
strange chill, and a lonely feeling come over me. But a
cloak was thrown over my shoulders, and a rug across my
knees, and the driver said in excellent German--

"The night is chill, mein Herr, and my master the Count
bade me take all care of you. There is a flask of slivovitz
(the plum brandy of the country) underneath the seat, if you
should require it."

I did not take any, but it was a comfort to know it was
there all the same. I felt a little strangely, and not a
little frightened. I think had there been any alternative I
should have taken it, instead of prosecuting that unknown
night journey. The carriage went at a hard pace straight
along, then we made a complete turn and went along another
straight road. It seemed to me that we were simply going
over and over the same ground again, and so I took note of
some salient point, and found that this was so. I would have
liked to have asked the driver what this all meant, but I
really feared to do so, for I thought that, placed as I was,
any protest would have had no effect in case there had been
an intention to delay.

By-and-by, however, as I was curious to know how time
was passing, I struck a match, and by its flame looked at my
watch. It was within a few minutes of midnight. This gave me
a sort of shock, for I suppose the general superstition
about midnight was increased by my recent experiences. I
waited with a sick feeling of suspense.

Then a dog began to howl somewhere in a farmhouse far
down the road, a long, agonized wailing, as if from fear.
The sound was taken up by another dog, and then another and
another, till, borne on the wind which now sighed softly
through the Pass, a wild howling began, which seemed to come
from all over the country, as far as the imagination could
grasp it through the gloom of the night.

At the first howl the horses began to strain and rear,
but the driver spoke to them soothingly, and they quieted
down, but shivered and sweated as though after a runaway
from sudden fright. Then, far off in the distance, from the
mountains on each side of us began a louder and a sharper
howling, that of wolves, which affected both the horses and
myself in the same way. For I was minded to jump from the
caleche and run, whilst they reared again and plunged madly,
so that the driver had to use all his great strength to keep
them from bolting. In a few minutes, however, my own ears
got accustomed to the sound, and the horses so far became
quiet that the driver was able to descend and to stand be-
fore them.

He petted and soothed them, and whispered something in
their ears, as I have heard of horse-tamers doing, and with
extraordinary effect, for under his caresses they became
quite manageable again, though they still trembled. The
driver again took his seat, and shaking his reins, started
off at a great pace. This time, after going to the far side
or the Pass, he suddenly turned down a narrow roadway which
ran sharply to the right.

Soon we were hemmed in with trees, which in places
arched right over the roadway till we passed as through a
tunnel. And again great frowning rocks guarded us boldly on
either side. Though we were in shelter, we could hear the
rising wind, for it moaned and whistled through the rocks,
and the branches of the trees crashed together as we swept
along. It grew colder and colder still, and fine, powdery
snow began to fall, so that soon we and all around us were
covered with a white blanket. The keen wind still carried
the howling of the dogs, though this grew fainter as we went
on our way. The baying of the wolves sounded nearer and near-
er, as though they were closing round on us from every side.
I grew dreadfully afraid, and the horses shared my fear. The
driver, however, was not in the least disturbed. He kept turn-
ing his head to left and right, but I could not see anything
through the darkness.

Suddenly, away on our left I saw a fain flickering blue
flame. The driver saw it at the same moment. He at once
checked the horses, and, jumping to the ground, disappeared
into the darkness. I did not know what to do, the less as
the howling of the wolves grew closer. But while I wondered,
the driver suddenly appeared again, and without a word took
his seat, and we resumed our journey. I think I must have
fallen asleep and kept dreaming of the incident, for it
seemed to be repeated endlessly, and now looking back, it is
like a sort of awful nightmare. Once the flame appeared so
near the road, that even in the darkness around us I could
watch the driver's motions. He went rapidly to where the
blue flame arose, it must have been very faint, for it did
not seem to illumine the place around it at all, and gather-
ing a few stones, formed them into some device.

Once there appeared a strange optical effect. When he
stood between me and the flame he did not obstruct it, for I
could see its ghostly flicker all the same. This startled me,
but as the effect was only momentary, I took it that my eyes
deceived me straining through the darkness. Then for a time
there were no blue flames, and we sped onwards through the
gloom, with the howling of the wolves around us, as though
they were following in a moving circle.

At last there came a time when the driver went further
afield than he had yet gone, and during his absence, the
horses began to tremble worse than ever and to snort and
scream with fright. I could not see any cause for it, for the
howling of the wolves had ceased altogether. But just then
the moon, sailing through the black clouds, appeared behind
the jagged crest of a beetling, pine-clad rock, and by its
light I saw around us a ring of wolves, with white teeth and
lolling red tongues, with long, sinewy limbs and shaggy hair.
They were a hundred times more terrible in the grim silence
which held them than even when they howled. For myself, I
felt a sort of paralysis of fear. It is only when a man feels
himself face to face with such horrors that he can under-
stand their true import.

All at once the wolves began to howl as though the moon-
light had had some peculiar effect on them. The horses jumped
about and reared, and looked helplessly round with eyes that
rolled in a way painful to see.  But the living ring of terror
encompassed them on every side, and they had perforce to
remain within it. I called to the coachman to come, for it
seemed to me that our only chance was to try to break out
through the ring and to aid his approach, I shouted and beat
the side of the caleche, hoping by the noise to scare the
wolves from the side, so as to give him a chance of reaching
the trap. How he came there, I know not, but I heard his
voice raised in a tone of imperious command, and looking
towards the sound, saw him stand in the roadway. As he swept
his long arms, as though brushing aside some impalpable
obstacle, the wolves fell back and back further still. Just
then a heavy cloud passed across the face of the moon, so
that we were again in darkness.

When I could see again the driver was climbing into the
caleche, and the wolves disappeared. This was all so strange
and uncanny that a dreadful fear came upon me, and I was
afraid to speak or move. The time seemed interminable as we
swept on our way, now in almost complete darkness, for the
rolling clouds obscured the moon.

We kept on ascending, with occasional periods of quick
descent, but in the main always ascending. Suddenly, I became
conscious of the fact that the driver was in the act of pull-
ing up the horses in the courtyard of a vast ruined castle,
from whose tall black windows came no ray of light,and whose
broken battlements showed a jagged line against the sky.





CHAPTER 2


Jonathan Harker's Journal Continued



5 May.--I must have been asleep, for certainly if I had
been fully awake I must have noticed the approach of such a
remarkable place. In the gloom the courtyard looked of con-
siderable size, and as several dark ways led from it under
great round arches, it perhaps seemed bigger than it really
is. I have not yet been able to see it by daylight.

When the caleche stopped, the driver jumped down and
held out his hand to assist me to alight. Again I could not
but notice his prodigious strength. His hand actually seemed
like a steel vice that could have crushed mine if he had
chosen. Then he took my traps, and placed them on the ground
beside me as I stood close to a great door, old and studded
with large iron nails, and set in a projecting doorway of
massive stone. I could see even in th e dim light that the
stone was massively carved, but that the carving had been
much worn by time and weather. As I stood, the driver jump-
ed again into his seat and shook the reins. The horses start-
ed forward,and trap and all disappeared down one of the dark
openings.

I stood in silence where I was, for I did not know what
to do. Of bell or knocker there was no sign. Through these
frowning walls and dark window openings it was not likely
that my voice could penetrate. The time I waited seemed end-
less, and I felt doubts and fears crowding upon me. What
sort of place had I come to, and among what kind of people?
What sort of grim adventure was it on which I had embarked?
Was this a customary incident in the life of a solicitor's
clerk sent out to explain the purchase of a London estate
to a foreigner? Solicitor's clerk! Mina would not like that.
Solicitor, for just before leaving London I got word that my
examination was successful, and I am now a full-blown solic-
itor! I began to rub my eyes and pinch myself to see if I
were awake. It all seemed like a horrible nightmare to me,
and I expected that I should suddenly awake, and find myself
at home, with the dawn struggling in through the windows, as
I had now and again felt in the morning after a day of over-
work. But my flesh answered the pinching test, and my eyes
were not to be deceived. I was indeed awake and among the
Carpathians. All I could do now was to be patient, and to
wait the coming of morning.

Just as I had come to this conclusion I heard a heavy
step approaching behind the great door, and saw through the
chinks the gleam of a coming light. Then there was the
sound of rattling chains and the clanking of massive bolts
drawn back. A key was turned with the loud grating noise of
long disuse, and the great door swung back.

Within, stood a tall old man, clean shaven save for a
long white moustache, and clad in black from head to foot,
without a single speck of colour about him anywhere. He
held in his hand an antique silver lamp, in which the flame
burned without a chimney or globe of any kind, throwing long
quivering shadows as it flickered in the draught of the open
door. The old man motioned me in with his right hand with a
courtly gesture, saying in excellent English, but with a
strange intonation.

"Welcome to my house! Enter freely and of your own free
will!" He made no motion of stepping to meet me, but stood
like a statue,as though his gesture of welcome had fixed him
into stone. The instant, however, that I had stepped over the
threshold, he moved impulsively forward, and holding out his
hand grasped mine with a strength which made me wince, an
effect which was not lessened by the fact that it seemed
cold as ice, more like the hand of a dead than a living man.
Again he said.

"Welcome to my house! Enter freely. Go safely, and leave
something of the happiness you bring!" The strength of the
handshake was so much akin to that which I had noticed in
the driver, whose face I had not seen, that for a moment I
doubted if it were not the same person to whom I was speak-
ing. So to make sure, I said interrogatively, "Count Drac-
ula?"

He bowed in a courtly was as he replied, "I am Dracula,
and I bid you welcome, Mr. Harker, to my house. Come in, the
night air is chill, and you must need to eat and rest."As he
was speaking, he put the lamp on a bracket on the wall, and
stepping out, took my luggage. He had carried it in before I
could forestall him. I protested, but he insisted.

"Nay, sir, you are my guest. It is late, and my people
are not available. Let me see to your comfort myself."He in-
sisted on carrying my traps along the passage, and then up a
great winding stair, and along another great passage, on
whose stone floor our steps rang heavily. At the end of this
he threw open a heavy door, and I rejoiced to see within a
well-lit room in which a table was spread for supper, and on
whose mighty hearth a great fire of logs, freshly replenished,
flamed and flared.

The Count halted, putting down my bags, closed the door,
and crossing the room, opened another door, which led into a
small octagonal room lit by a single lamp, and seemingly
without a window of any sort. Passing through this, he open-
ed another door, and motioned me to enter. It was a welcome
sight. For here was a great bedroom well lighted and warmed
with another log fire, also added to but lately, for the top
logs were fresh, which sent a hollow roar up the wide chim-
ney. The Count himself left my luggage inside and withdrew,
saying, before he closed the door.

"You will need, after your journey, to refresh yourself
by making your toilet. I trust you will find all you wish.
When you are ready, come into the other room, where you will
find your supper prepared."

The light and warmth and the Count's courteous welcome
seemed to have dissipated all my doubts and fears. Having
then reached my normal state, I discovered that I was half
famished with hunger. So making a hasty toilet, I went into
the other room.

I found supper already laid out. My host, who stood on
one side of the great fireplace, leaning against the stone-
work, made a graceful wave of his hand to the table, and
said,

"I pray you, be seated and sup how you please. You will
I trust, excuse me that I do not join you, but I have dined
already, and I do not sup."

I handed to him the sealed letter which Mr. Hawkins had
entrusted to me. He opened it and read it gravely. Then,
with a charming smile, he handed it to me to read. One pass-
age of it, at least, gave me a thrill of pleasure.

"I must regret that an attack of gout, from which mal-
ady I am a constant sufferer, forbids absolutely any travel-
ling on my part for some time to come. But I am happy to say
I can send a sufficient substitute, one in whom I have every
possible confidence. He is a young man, full of energy and
talent in his own way, and of a very faithful disposition.
He is discreet and silent, and has grown into manhood in my
service. He shall be ready to attend on you when you will
during his stay, and shall take your instructions in all
matters."

The count himself came forward and took off the cover
of a dish, and I fell to at once on an excellent roast
chicken. This, with some cheese and a salad and a bottle of
old tokay, of which I had two glasses, was my supper. During
the time I was eating it the Count asked me many question
as to my journey, and I told him by degrees all I had
experienced.

By this time I had finished my supper,and by my host's
desire had drawn up a chair by the fire and begun to smoke
a cigar which he offered me, at the same time excusing him-
self that he did not smoke. I had now an opportunity of
observing him, and found him of a very marked physiognomy.

His face was a strong, a very strong, aquiline, with
high bridge of the thin nose and peculiarly arched nostrils,
with lofty domed forehead, and hair growing scantily round
the temples but profusely elsewhere. His eyebrows were very
massive, almost meeting over the nose, and with bushy hair
that seemed to curl in its own profusion. The mouth, so
far as I could see it under the heavy moustache, was fixed
and rather cruel-looking, with peculiarly sharp white teeth.
These protruded over the lips, whose remarkable ruddiness
showed astonishing vitality in a man of his years. For the
rest, his ears were pale, and at the tops extremely point-
ed. The chin was broad and strong, and the cheeks firm
though thin. The general effect was one of extraordinary
pallor.

Hitherto I had noticed the backs of his hands as they
lay on his knees in the firelight, and they had seemed
rather white and fine. But seeing them now close to me, I
could not but notice that they were rather coarse, broad,
with squat fingers. Strange to say, there were hairs in the
centre of the palm. The nails were long and fine, and cut
to a sharp point. As the Count leaned over me and his hands
touched me, I could not repress a shudder. It may have been
that his breath was rank, but a horrible feeling of nausea
came over me, which, do what I would, I could not conceal.

The Count, evidently noticing it, drew back. And with
a grim sort of smile, which showed more than he had yet
done his protruberant teeth, sat himself down again on his
own side of the fireplace. We were both silent for a while,
and as I looked towards the window I saw the first dim
streak of the coming dawn. There seemed a strange stillness
over everything. But as I listened, I heard as if from down
below in the valley the howling of many wolves. The Count's
eyes gleamed, and he said.

"Listen to them, the children of the night. What music
they make!" Seeing, I suppose, some expression in my face
strange to him, he added, "Ah, sir, you dwellers in the city
cannot enter into the feelings of the hunter." Then he rose
and said.

"But you must be tired. Your bedroom is all ready, and
tomorrow you shall sleep as late as you will. I have to be
away till the afternoon, so sleep well and dream well!"
With a courteous bow, he opened for me himself the door to
the octagonal room, and I entered my bedroom.

I am all in a sea of wonders. I doubt. I fear. I think
strange things, which I dare not confess to my own soul.
God keep me, if only for the sake of those dear to me!


7 May.--It is again early morning, but I have rested
and enjoyed the last twenty-four hours. I slept till late
in the day, and awoke of my own accord. When I had dressed
myself I went into the room where we had supped, and found
a cold breakfast laid out, with coffee kept hot by the pot
being placed on the hearth. There was a card on the table,
on which was written--

"I have to be absent for a while. Do not wait for me.
D." I set to and enjoyed a hearty meal. When I had done,
I looked for a bell, so that I might let the servants know
I had finished, but I could not find one. There are cer-
tainly odd deficiencies in the house, considering the ex-
traordinary evidences of wealth which are round me. The
table service is of gold, and so beautifully wrought that
it must be of immense value. The curtains and upholstery
of the chairs and sofas and the hangings of my bed are of
the costliest and most beautiful fabrics, and must have
been of fabulous value when they were made, for they are
centuries old, though in excellent order. I saw something
like them in Hampton Court, but they were worn and frayed
and moth-eaten. But still in none of the rooms is there a
mirror. There is not even a toilet glass on my table, and
I had to get the little shaving glass from my bag before I
could either shave or brush my hair. I have not yet seen a
servant anywhere, or heard a sound near the castle except
the howling of wolves. Some time after I had finished my
meal, I do not know whether to call it breakfast of dinner,
for it was between five and six o'clock when I had it, I
looked about for something to read, for I did not like to
go about the castle until I had asked the Count's permiss-
ion. There was absolutely nothing in the room, book, news-
paper, or even writing materials, so I opened another door
in the room and found a sort of library. The door opposite
mine I tried, but found locked.

In the library I found, to my great delight, a vast
number of English books, whole shelves full of them, and
bound volumes of magazines and newspapers. A table in the
center was littered with English magazines and newspapers,
though none of them were of very recent date. The books
were of the most varied kind, history, geography, politics,
political economy, botany, geology, law, all relating to
England and English life and customs and manners. There
were even such books of reference as the London Directory,
the "Red" and "Blue" books, Whitaker's Almanac, the Army
and Navy Lists, and it somehow gladdened my heart to see
it, the Law List.

Whilst I was looking at the books, the door opened,
and the Count entered. He saluted me in a hearty way, and
hoped that I had had a good night's rest. Then he went on.

"I am glad you found your way in here, for I am sure
there is much that will interest you. These companions,"
and he laid his hand on some of the books, "have been good
friends to me, and for some years past, ever since I had
the idea of going to London, have given me many, many hours
of pleasure. Through them I have come to know your great
England, and to know her is to love her. I long to go
through the crowded streets of your mighty London, to be
in the midst of the whirl and rush of humanity, to share
its life, its change, its death, and all that makes it what
it is. But alas! As yet I only know your tongue through
books. To you, my friend, I look that I know it to speak."

"But, Count," I said, "You know and speak English
thoroughly!" He bowed gravely.

"I thank you, my friend, for your all too-flattering
estimate, but yet I fear that I am but a little way on the
road I would travel. True, I know the grammar and the words,
but yet I know not how to speak them.

"Indeed," I said, "You speak excellently."

"Not so," he answered. "Well, I know that, did I move
and speak in your London, none there are who would not know
me for a stranger. That is not enough for me. Here I am nob-
le. I am a Boyar. The common people know me, and I am master.
But a stranger in a strange land, he is no one. Men know
him not, and to know not is to care not for. I am content
if I am like the rest, so that no man stops if he sees me,
or pauses in his speaking if he hears my words, `Ha, ha!
A stranger!' I have been so long master that I would be
master still, or at least that none other should be master
of me. You come to me not alone as agent of my friend Peter
Hawkins, of Exeter, to tell me all about my new estate in
London. You shall, I trust, rest here with me a while, so
that by our talking I may learn the English intonation. And
I would that you tell me when I make error, even of the
smallest, in my speaking. I am sorry that I had to be away
so long today, but you will, I know forgive one who has so
many important affairs in hand."

Of course I said all I could about being willing, and
asked if I might come into that room when I chose. He ans-
wered, "Yes, certainly," and added.

"You may go anywhere you wish in the castle, except
where the doors are locked, where of course you will not
wish to go. There is reason that all things are as they are,
and did you see with my eyes and know with my knowledge,
you would perhaps better understand." I said I was sure of
this, and then he went on.

"We are in Transylvania, and Transylvania is not Eng-
land. Our ways are not your ways, and there shall be to you
many strange things. Nay, from what you have told me of
your experiences already, you know something of what
strange things there may be."

This led to much conversation, and as it was evident
that he wanted to talk, if only for talking's sake, I ask-
ed him many questions regarding things that had already
happened to me or come within my notice. Sometimes he
sheered off the subject, or turned the conversation by
pretending not to understand, but generally he answered
all I asked most frankly. Then as time went on, and I had
got somewhat bolder, I asked him of some of the strange
things of the preceding night, as for instance, why the
coachman went to the places where he had seen the blue
flames. He then explained to me that it was commonly
believed that on a certain night of the year, last night,
in fact, when all evil spirits are supposed to have un-
checked sway, a blue flame is seen over any place where
treasure has been concealed.

"That treasure has been hidden," he went on, "in the
region through which you came last night, there can be but
little doubt. For it was the ground fought over for centur-
ies by the Wallachian, the Saxon, and the Turk. Why, there
is hardly a foot of soil in all this region that has not
been enriched by the blood of men, patriots or invaders.
In the old days there were stirring times, when the Aust-
rian and the Hungarian came up in hordes, and the patriots
went out to meet them, men and women, the aged and the chil-
dren too, and waited their coming on the rocks above the
passes, that they might sweep destruction on them with
their artificial avalanches. When the invader was trium-
phant he found but little, for whatever there was had been
sheltered in the friendly soil."

"But how," said I, "can it have remained so long un-
discovered, when there is a sure index to it if men will
but take the trouble to look? "The Count smiled, and as his
lips ran back over his gums, the long, sharp, canine teeth
showed out strangely. He answered.

"Because your peasant is at heart a coward and a fool!
Those flames only appear on one night, and on that night no
man of this land will, if he can help it, stir without his
doors. And, dear sir, even if he did he would not know what
to do. Why, even the peasant that you tell me of who marked
the place of the flame would not know where to look in day-
light even for his own work. Even you would not, I dare be
sworn, be able to find these places again?"

"There you are right," I said. "I know no more than the
dead where even to look for them." Then we drifted into
other matters.

"Come," he said at last, "tell me of London and of the
house which you have procured for me." With an apology for
my remissness, I went into my own room to get the papers
from my bag. Whilst I was placing them in order I heard a
rattling of china and silver in the next room, and as I
passed through, noticed that the table had been cleared and
the lamp lit, for it was by this time deep into the dark.
The lamps were also lit in the study or library, and I
found the Count lying on the sofa, reading, of all things
in the world, and English Bradshaw's Guide. When I came in
he cleared the books and papers from the table, and with
him I went into plans and deeds and figures of all sorts.
He was interested in everything, and asked me a myriad
questions about the place and its surroundings. He clearly
had studied beforehand all he could get on the subject of
the neighborhood, for he evidently at the end knew very
much more than I did. When I remarked this, he answered.

"Well, but, my friend, is it not needful that I should?
When I go there I shall be all alone, and my friend Harker
Jonathan, nay, pardon me. I fall into my country's habit of
putting your patronymic first, my friend Jonathan Harker
will not be by my side to correct and aid me. He will be
in Exeter, miles away, probably working at papers of the
law with my other friend, Peter Hawkins. So!"

We went thoroughly into the business of the purchase
of the estate at Purfleet. When I had told him the facts
and got his signature to the necessary papers, and had
written a letter with them ready to post to Mr. Hawkins, he
began to ask me how I had come across so suitable a place.
I read to him the notes which I had made at the time, and
which I inscribe here.

"At Purfleet, on a by-road, I came across just such a
place as seemed to be required, and where was displayed a
dilapidated notice that the place was for sale. It was sur-
rounded by a high wall, of ancient structure, built of heavy
stones, and has not been repaired for a large number of
years. The closed gates are of heavy old oak and iron, all
eaten with rust.

"The estate is called Carfax, no doubt a corruption of
the old Quatre Face, as the house is four sided, agreeing
with the cardinal points of the compass. It contains in all
some twenty acres, quite surrounded by the solid stone wall
above mentioned. There are many trees on it, which make it
in places gloomy, and there is a deep, dark-looking pond
or small lake, evidently fed by some springs, as the water
is clear and flows away in a fair-sized stream. The house
is very large and of all periods back, I should say, to
mediaeval times, for one part is of stone immensely thick,
with only a few windows high up and heavily barred with
iron. It looks like part of a keep, and is close to an old
chapel or church. I could not enter it, as I had not the
key of the door leading to it from the house, but I have
taken with my Kodak views of it from various points. The
house had been added to, but in a very straggling way, and
I can only guess at the amount of ground it covers, which
must be very great. There are but few houses close at
hand, one being a very large house only recently added
to and formed into a private lunatic asylum. It is not, how-
ever, visible from the grounds."

When I had finished, he said, "I am glad that it is old
and big. I myself am of an old family, and to live in a new
house would kill me. A house cannot be made habitable in a
day, and after all, how few days go to make up a century. I
rejoice also that there is a chapel of old times. We Tran-
sylvanian nobles love not to think that our bones may lie
amongst the common dead. I seek not gaiety nor mirth, not
the bright voluptuousness of much sunshine and sparkling
waters which please the young and gay. I am no longer
young, and my heart, through weary years of mourning over
the dead, is attuned to mirth. Moreover, the walls of my
castle are broken. The shadows are many, and the wind
breathes cold through the broken battlements and casements.
I love the shade and the shadow, and would be alone with
my thoughts when I may." Somehow his words and his look
did not seem to accord, or else it was that his cast of
face made his smile look malignant and saturnine.

Presently, with an excuse, he left me, asking me to
pull my papers together. He was some little time away, and
I began to look at some of the books around me. One was an
atlas, which I found opened naturally to England, as if
that map had been much used. On looking at it I found in
certain places little rings marked, and on examining these
I noticed that one was near London on the east side, mani-
festly where his new estate was situated. The other two
were Exeter, and Whitby on the Yorkshire coast.

It was the better part of an hour when the Count re-
turned. "Aha!" he said. "Still at your books? Good! But
you must not work always. Come! I am informed that your
supper is ready." He took my arm, and we went into the next
room, where I found an excellent supper ready on the table.
The Count again excused himself, as he had dined out on
his being away from home. But he sat as on the previous
night, and chatted whilst I ate. After supper I smoked,
as on the last evening, and the Count stayed with me, chat-
ting and asking questions on every conceivable subject,
hour after hour. I felt that it was getting very late in-
deed, but I did not say anything, for I felt under
obligation to meet my host's wishes in every way. I was
not sleepy, as the long sleep yesterday had fortified me,
but I could not help experiencing that chill which comes
over one at the coming of the dawn, which is like, in its
way, the turn of the tide. They say that people who are
near death die generally at the change to dawn or at the
turn of the tide. Anyone who has when tired, and tied as
it were to his post, experienced this change in the
atmosphere can well believe it. All at once we heard the
crow of the cock coming up with preternatural shrillness
through the clear morning air.

Count Dracula, jumping to his feet, said, "Why there
is the morning again! How remiss I am to let you stay up so
long. You must make your conversation regarding my dear new
country of England less interesting, so that I may not for-
get how time flies by us," and with a courtly bow, he
quickly left me.

I went into my room and drew the curtains, but there
was little to notice. My window opened into the courtyard,
all I could see was the warm grey of quickening sky. So I
pulled the curtains again, and have written of this day.


8 May.--I began to fear as I wrote in this book that I
was getting too diffuse. But now I am glad that I went into
detail from the first, for there is something so strange
about this place and all in it that I cannot but feel uneasy.
I wish I were safe out of it, or that I had never come. It
may be that this strange night existence is telling on me,
but would that that were all! If there were any one to
talk to I could bear it, but there is no one. I have only the
Count to speak with, and he-- I fear I am myself the only
living soul within the place. Let me be prosaiac so far as
facts can be. It will help me to bear up, and imagination
must not run riot with me. If it does I am lost. Let me say
at once how I stand, or seem to.

I only slept a few hours when I went to bed,and feeling
that I could not sleep any more, got up. I had hung my shav-
ing glass by the window, and was just beginning to shave.
Suddenly I felt a hand on my shoulder, and heard the Count's
voice saying to me, "Good morning." I started, for it amazed
me that I had not seen him, since the reflection of the glass
covered the whole room behind me. In starting I had cut my-
self slightly, but did not notice it at the moment. Having
answered the Count's salutation, I turned to the glass again
to see how I had been mistaken. This time there could be no
error, for the man was close to me, and I could see him
over my shoulder. But there was no reflection of him in the
mirror! The whole room behind me was displayed, but there
was no sign of a man in it, except myself.

This was startling, and coming on the top of so many
strange things, was beginning to increase that vague feeling
of uneasiness which I always have when the Count is near.
But at the instant I saw the the cut had bled a little, and
the blood was trickling over my chin. I laid down the razor,
turning as I did so half round to look for some sticking
plaster. When the Count saw my face, his eyes blazed with a
sort of demoniac fury, and he suddenly made a grab at my
throat. I drew away and his hand touched the string of
beads which held the crucifix. It made an instant change
in him, for the fury passed so quickly that I could hardly
believe that it was ever there.

"Take care," he said, "take care how you cut yourself.
It is more dangerous that you think in this country." Then
seizing the shaving glass, he went on, "And this is the
wretched thing that has done the mischief. It is a foul
bauble of man's vanity. Away with it!" And opening the
window with one wrench of his terrible hand, he flung out
the glass, which was shattered into a thousand pieces on
the stones of the courtyard far below. Then he withdrew
without a word. It is very annoying, for I do not see how
I am to shave, unless in my watch-case or the bottom of
the shaving pot, which is fortunately of metal.

When I went into the dining room, breakfast was pre-
pared, but I could not find the Count anywhere. So I break-
fasted alone. It is strange that as yet I have not seen the
Count eat or drink. He must be a very peculiar man! After
breakfast I did a little exploring in the castle. I went out
on the stairs, and found a room looking towards the South.

The view was magnificent, and from where I stood there
was every opportunity of seeing it. The castle is on the
very edge of a terrific precipice. A stone falling from the
window would fall a thousand feet without touching anything!
As far as the eye can reach is a sea of green tree tops, with
occasionally a deep rift where there is a chasm. Here and
there are silver threads where the rivers wind in deep
gorges through the forests.

But I am not in heart to describe beauty, for when I had
seen the view I explored further. Doors, doors, doors every-
where, and all locked and bolted. In no place save from the
windows in the castle walls is there an available exit. The
castle is a veritable prison, and I am a prisoner!




CHAPTER 3


Jonathan Harker's Journal Continued


When I found that I was a prisoner a sort of wild feel-
ing came over me. I rushed up and down the stairs, trying
every door and peering out of every window I could find, but
after a little the conviction of my helplessness overpowered
all other feelings. When I look back after a few hours I
think I must have been mad for the time, for I behaved much
as a rat does in a trap. When, however, the conviction had
come to me that I was helpless I sat down quietly, as quiet-
ly as I have ever done anything in my life, and began to
think over what was best to be done. I am thinking still,
and as yet have come to no definite conclusion. Of one thing
only am I certain. That it is no use making my ideas known
to the Count. He knows well that I am imprisoned, and as he
has done it himself, and has doubtless his own motives for
it, he would only deceive me if I trusted him fully with the
facts. So far as I can see, my only plan will be to keep my
knowledge and my fears to myself, and my eyes open. I am, I
know, either being deceived, like a baby, by my own fears,
or else I am in desperate straits, and if the latter be so,
I need, and shall need, all my brains to get through.

I had hardly come to this conclusion when I heard the
great door below shut, and knew that the Count had returned.
He did not come at once into the library, so I went cau-
tiously to my own room and found him making the bed. This
was odd, but only confirmed what I had all along thought,
that there are no servants in the house. When later I saw
him through the chink of the hinges of the door laying the
table in the dining room, I was assured of it. For if he
does himself all these menial offices, surely it is proof
that there is no one else in the castle, it must have been
the Count himself who was the driver of the coach that
brought me here. This is a terrible thought, for if so,
what does it mean that he could control the wolves, as he
did, by only holding up his hand for silence? How was it
that all the people at Bistritz and on the coach had some
terrible fear for me? What meant the giving of the crucifix,
of the garlic, of the wild rose, of the mountain ash?

Bless that good, good woman who hung the crucifix round
my neck! For it is a comfort and a strength to me whenever I
touch it. It is odd that a thing which I have been taught to
regard with disfavour and as idolatrous should in a time of
loneliness and trouble be of help. Is it that there is some-
thing in the essence of the thing itself, or that it is a
medium, a tangible help, in conveying memories of sympathy
and comfort? Some time, if it may be, I must examine this
matter and try to make up my mind about it. In the meantime
I must find out all I can about Count Dracula,as it may help
me to understand. Tonight he may talk of himself, if I turn
the conversation that way. I must be very careful, however,
not to awake his suspicion.


Midnight.--I have had a long talk with the Count. I
asked him a few questions on Transylvania history, and he
warmed up to the subject wonderfully. In his speaking of
things and people, and especially of battles, he spoke as if
he had been present at them all. This he afterwards explained
by saying that to a Boyar the pride of his house and name is
his own pride, that their glory is his glory, that their fate
is his fate. Whenever he spoke of his house he always said
"we", and spoke almost in the plural, like a king speaking.
I wish I could put down all he said exactly as he said it,
for to me it was most fascinating. It seemed to have in it
a whole history of the country. He grew excited as he spoke,
and walked about the room pulling his great white moustache
and grasping anything on which he laid his hands as though
he would crush it by main strength. One thing he said which
I shall put down as nearly as I can, for it tells in its way
the story of his race.

"We Szekelys have a right to be proud, for in our veins
flows the blood of many brave races who fought as the lion
fights, for lordship. Here, in the whirlpool of European
races, the Ugric tribe bore down from Iceland the fighting
spirit which Thor and Wodin game them, which their Berserkers
displayed to such fell intent on the seaboards of Europe,
aye, and of Asia and Africa too, till the peoples thought
that the werewolves themselves had come. Here, too, when
they came, they found the Huns, whose warlike fury had
swept the earth like a living flame, till the dying peoples
held that in their veins ran the blood of those old witches,
who, expelled from Scythia had mated with the devils in the
desert. Fools, fools! What devil or what witch was ever so
great as Attila, whose blood is in these veins?" He held up
his arms. "Is it a wonder that we were a conquering race,
that we were proud, that when the Magyar, the Lombard, the
Avar, the Bulgar, or the Turk poured his thousands on our
frontiers, we drove them back? Is it strange that when Arpad
and his legions swept through the Hungarian fatherland he
found us here when he reached the frontier, that the Honfog-
lalas was completed there? And when the Hungarian flood swept
eastward, the Szekelys were claimed as kindred by the victor-
ious Magyars, and to us for centuries was trusted the guard-
ing of the frontier of Turkeyland. Aye, and more than that,
endless duty of the frontier guard, for as the Turks say,
`water sleeps, and the enemy is sleepless.' Who more gladly
than we throughout the Four Nations received the `bloody
sword,' or at its warlike call flocked quicker to the stand-
ard of the King? When was redeemed that great shame of my
nation, the shame of Cassova, when the flags of the Wallach
and the Magyar went down beneath the Crescent? Who was it but
one of my own race who as Voivode crossed the Danube and
beat the Turk on his own ground? This was a Dracula indeed!
Woe was it that his own unworthy brother, when he had fallen,
sold his people to the Turk and brought the shame of slavery
on them! Was it not this Dracula, indeed, who inspired that
other of his race who in a later age again and again brought
his forces over the great river into Turkeyland, who, when he
was beaten back, came again, and again, though he had to come
alone from the bloody field where his troops were being
slaughtered, since he knew that he alone could ultimately
triumph! They said that he thought only of himself.  Bah! What
good are peasants without a leader? Where ends the war with-
out a brain and heart to conduct it? Again, when, after the
battle of Mohacs, we threw off the Hungarian yoke, we of the
Dracula blood were amongst their leaders, for our spirit
would not brook that we were not free. Ah, young sir, the
Szekelys, and the Dracula as their heart's blood, their
brains, and their swords, can boast a record that mushroom
growths like the Hapsburgs and the Romanoffs can never reach.
The warlike days are over. Blood is too precious a thing in
these days of dishonourable peace, and the glories of the
great races are as a tale that is told."

It was by this time close on morning, and we went to
bed. (Mem., this diary seems horribly like the beginning of
the "Arabian Nights," for everything has to break off at
cockcrow, or like the ghost of Hamlet's father.)


12 May.--Let me begin with facts, bare, meager facts,
verified by books and figures, and of which there can be no
doubt. I must not confuse them with experiences which will
have to rest on my own observation, or my memory of them.
Last evening when the Count came from his room he began by
asking me questions on legal matters and on the doing of
certain kinds of business. I had spent the day wearily over
books, and, simply to keep my mind occupied, went over some
of the matters I had been examined in at Lincoln's Inn. There
was a certain method in the Count's inquiries, so I shall
try to put them down in sequence. The knowledge may somehow
or some time be useful to me.

First, he asked if a man in England might have two so-
licitors or more. I told him he might have a dozen if he
wished, but that it would not be wise to have more than one
solicitor engaged in one transaction, as only one could act
at a time, and that to change would be certain to militate
against his interest. He seemed thoroughly to understand,
and went on to ask if there would be any practical difficul-
ty in having one man to attend, say, to banking, and another
to look after shipping, in case local help were needed in a
place far from the home of the banking solicitor. I asked
to explain more fully, so that I might not by any chance
mislead him, so he said,

"I shall illustrate. Your friend and mine, Mr. Peter
Hawkins, from under the shadow of your beautiful cathedral
at Exeter, which is far from London, buys for me through
your good self my place at London. Good! Now here let me
say frankly, lest you should think it strange that I have
sought the services of one so far off from London instead of
some one resident there, that my motive was that no local
interest might be served save my wish only, and as one of
London residence might, perhaps, have some purpose of himself
or friend to serve, I went thus afield to seek my agent,
whose labours should be only to my interest. Now, suppose I,
who have much of affairs, wish to ship goods, say, to New-
castle, or Durham, or Harwich, or Dover, might it not be that
it could with more ease be done by consigning to one in
these ports?"

I answered that certainly it would be most easy, but
that we solicitors had a system of agency one for the other,
so that local work could be done locally on instruction from
any solicitor, so that the client, simply placing himself
in the hands of one man, could have his wishes carried out
by him without further trouble.

"But," said he, "I could be at liberty to direct myself.
Is it not so?"

"Of course, " I replied, and "Such is often done by men
of business, who do not like the whole of their affairs to be
known by any one person."

"Good!" he said,and then went on to ask about the means
of making consignments and the forms to be gone through, and
of all sorts of difficulties which might arise, but by fore-
thought could be guarded against. I explained all these
things to him to the best of my ability, and he certainly
left me under the impression that he would have made a
wonderful solicitor, for there was nothing that he did not
think of or foresee. For a man who was never in the country,
and who did not evidently do much in the way of business, his
knowledge and acumen were wonderful. When he had satisfied
himself on these points of which he had spoken, and I had
verified all as well as I could by the books available, he
suddenly stood up and said, "Have you written since your
first letter to our friend Mr. Peter Hawkins, or to any
other?"

It was with some bitterness in my heart that I answered
that I had not, that as yet I had not seen any opportunity
of sending letters to anybody.

"Then write now, my young friend," he said, laying a
heavy hand on my shoulder, "write to our friend and to any
other, and say, if it will please you, that you shall stay
with me until a month from now."

"Do you wish me to stay so long?" I asked, for my heart
grew cold at the thought.

"I desire it much, nay I will take no refusal. When your
master, employer, what you will, engaged that someone should
come on his behalf, it was understood that my needs only were
to be consulted. I have not stinted. Is it not so?"

What could I do but bow acceptance? It was Mr. Hawkins'
interest, not mine, and I had to think of him, not myself,
and besides, while Count Dracula was speaking, there was
that in his eyes and in his bearing which made me remember
that I was a prisoner, and that if I wished it I could have
no choice. The Count saw his victory in my bow, and his mas-
tery in the trouble of my face, for he began at once to use
them, but in his own smooth, resistless way.

"I pray you, my good young friend, that you will not
discourse of things other than business in your letters. It
will doubtless please your friends to know that you are well,
and that you look forward to getting home to them. Is it not
so?" As he spoke he handed me three sheets of note paper
and three envelopes. They were all of the thinnest foreign
post, and looking at them, then at him, and noticing his
quiet smile, with the sharp, canine teeth lying over the red
underlip, I understood as well as if he had spoken that I
should be more careful what I wrote, for he would be able to
read it. So I determined to write only formal notes now, but
to write fully to Mr. Hawkins in secret, and also to Mina,
for to her I could write shorthand, which would puzzle the
Count, if he did see it. When I had written my two letters I
sat quiet, reading a book whilst the Count wrote several
notes, referring as he wrote them to some books on his table.
Then he took up my two and placed them with his own, and put
by his writing materials, after which, the instant the door
had closed behind him, I leaned over and looked at the lett-
ers, which were face down on the table. I felt no compunction
in doing so for under the circumstances I felt that I should
protect myself in every way I could.

One of the letters was directed to Samuel F. Billington,
No. 7, The Crescent, Whitby, another to Herr Leutner, Varna.
The third was to Coutts & Co., London, and the fourth to
Herren Klopstock & Billreuth, bankers, Buda Pesth. The
second and fourth were unsealed. I was just about to look at
them when I saw the door handle move. I sank back in my seat,
having just had time to resume my book before the Count,
holding still another letter in his hand, entered the room.
He took up the letters on the table and stamped them care-
fully, and then turning to me, said,

"I trust you will forgive me, but I have much work to
do in private this evening. You will, I hope, find all things
as you wish." At the door he turned, and after a moment's
pause said, "Let me advise you, my dear young friend. Nay,
let me warn you with all seriousness, that should you leave
these rooms you will not by any chance go to sleep in any
other part of the castle. It is old, and has many memories,
and there are bad dreams for those who sleep unwisely. Be
warned! Should sleep now or ever overcome you, or be like to
do, then haste to your own chamber or to these rooms, for
your rest will then be safe. But if you be not careful in
this respect, then," He finished his speech in a gruesome
way, for he motioned with his hands as if he were washing
them. I quite understood. My only doubt was as to whether
any dream could be more terrible than the unnatural, horrible
net of gloom and mystery which seemed closing around me.


Later.--I endorse the last words written, but this time
there is no doubt in question. I shall not fear to sleep in
any place where he is not. I have placed the crucifix over
the head of my bed, I imagine that my rest is thus freer from
dreams, and there it shall remain.

When he left me I went to my room. After a little while,
not hearing any sound, I came out and went up the stone stair
to where I could look out towards the South. There was some
sense of freedom in the vast expanse, inaccessible though it
was to me,as compared with the narrow darkness of the court-
yard. Looking out on this, I felt that I was indeed in pri-
son, and I seemed to want a breath of fresh air, though it
were of the night. I am beginning to feel this nocturnal ex-
istence tell on me. It is destroying my nerve. I start at
my own shadow, and am full of all sorts of horrible imagin-
ings. God knows that there is ground for my terrible fear in
this accursed place! I looked out over the beautiful expanse,
bathed in soft yellow moonlight till it was almost as light
as day. In the soft light the distant hills became melted,
and the shadows in the valleys and gorges of velvety black-
ness. The mere beauty seemed to cheer me. There was peace
and comfort in every breath I drew. As I leaned from the win-
dow my eye was caught by something moving a storey below me,
and somewhat to my left, where I imagined, from the order of
the rooms, that the windows of the Count's own room would
look out. The window at which I stood was tall and deep,
stone-mullioned, and though weatherworn, was still complete.
But it was evidently many a day since the case had been
there. I drew back behind the stonework, and looked carefully
out.

What I saw was the Count's head coming out from the
window. I did not see the face, but I knew the man by the
neck and the movement of his back and arms. In any case I
could not mistake the hands which I had had some many oppor-
tunities of studying. I was at first interested and somewhat
amused, for it is wonderful how small a matter will interest
and amuse a man when he is a prisoner. But my very feelings
changed to repulsion and terror when I saw the whole man
slowly emerge from the window and begin to crawl down the
castle wall over the dreadful abyss, face down with his cloak
spreading out around him like great wings. At first I could
not believe my eyes. I thought it was some trick of the moon-
light, some weird effect of shadow, but I kept looking, and
it could be no delusion. I saw the fingers and toes grasp the
corners of the stones, worn clear of the mortar by the stress
of years, and by thus using every projection and inequality
move downwards with considerable speed, just as a lizard
moves along a wall.

What manner of man is this, or what manner of creature,
is it in the semblance of man? I feel the dread of this hor-
rible place overpowering me. I am in fear, in awful fear, and
there is no escape for me. I am encompassed about with
terrors that I dare not think of.


15 May.--Once more I have seen the count go out in his
lizard fashion. He moved downwards in a sidelong way, some
hundred feet down, and a good deal to the left. He vanished
into some hole or window. When his head had disappeared, I
leaned out to try and see more, but without avail. The dis-
tance was too great to allow a proper angle of sight. I knew
he had left the castle now, and thought to use the opportun-
ity to explore more than I had dared to do as yet. I went
back to the room, and taking a lamp, tried all the doors.
They were all locked, as I had expected, and the locks were
comparatively new. But I went down the stone stairs to the
hall where I had entered originally. I found I could pull
back the bolts easily enough and unhook the great chains.
But the door was locked, and the key was gone! That key must
be in the Count's room. I must watch should his door be un-
locked, so that I may get it and escape. I went on to make
a thorough examination of the various stairs and passages,
and to try the doors that opened from them. One or two
small rooms near the hall were open, but there was nothing
to see in them except old furniture, dusty with age and
moth-eaten. At last, however, I found one door at the top of
the stairway which, though it seemed locked, gave a little
under pressure. I tried it harder, and found that it was not
really locked, but that the resistance came from the fact
that the hinges had fallen somewhat,and the heavy door rest-
ed on the floor. Here was an opportunity which I might not
have again, so I exerted myself,and with many efforts forced
it back so that I could enter. I was now in a wing of the
castle further to the right than the rooms I knew and a
storey lower down. From the windows I could see that the
suite of rooms lay along to the south of the castle, the win-
dows of the end room looking out both west and south. On the
latter side, as well as to the former, there was a great
precipice. The castle was built on the corner of a great
rock, so that on three sides it was quite impregnable, and
great windows were placed here where sling, or bow, or culv-
erin could not reach, and consequently light and comfort,
impossible to a position which had to be guarded, were secu-
red. To the west was a great valley, and then, rising far
away, great jagged mountain fastnesses, rising peak on peak,
the sheer rock studded with mountain ash and thorn, whose
roots clung in cracks and crevices and crannies of the stone.
This was evidently the portion of the castle occupied by the
ladies in bygone days, for the furniture had more an air of
comfort than any I had seen.

The windows were curtainless, and the yellow moonlight,
flooding in through the diamond panes, enabled one to see
even colours, whilst it softened the wealth of dust which lay
over all and disguised in some measure the ravages of time
and moth. My lamp seemed to be of little effect in the brill-
iant moonlight, but I was glad to have it with me, for there
was a dread loneliness in the place which chilled my heart
and made my nerves tremble. Still, it was better than living
alone in the rooms which I had come to hate from the pre-
sence of the Count, and after trying a little to school my
nerves, I found a soft quietude come over me. Here I am,
sitting at a little oak table where in old times possibly
some fair lady sat to pen, with much thought and many blushes,
her ill-spelt love letter, and writing in my diary in short-
hand all that has happened since I closed it last. It is the
nineteenth century up-to-date with a vengeance. And yet, un-
less my senses deceive me, the old centuries had, and have,
powers of their own which mere "modernity" cannot kill.


Later: The morning of 16 May.--God preserve my sanity,
for to this I am reduced. Safety and the assurance of safety
are things of the past. Whilst I live on here there is but
one thing to hope for, that I may not go mad, if, indeed, I
be not mad already. If I be sane, then surely it is maddening
to think that of all the foul things that lurk in this hate-
ful place the Count is the least dreadful to me, that to him
alone I can look for safety, even though this be only whilst
I can serve his purpose. Great God! Merciful God, let me be
calm, for out of that way lies madness indeed. I begin to
get new lights on certain things which have puzzled me. Up
to now I never quite knew what Shakespeare meant when he
made Hamlet say, "My tablets! Quick, my tablets! `tis meet
that I put it down," etc., For now, feeling as though my own
brain were unhinged or as if the shock had come which must
end in its undoing, I turn to my diary for repose. The habit
of entering accurately must help to soothe me.

The Count's mysterious warning frightened me at the
time. It frightens me more not when I think of it, for in
the future he has a fearful hold upon me. I shall fear to
doubt what he may say!

When I had written in my diary and had fortunately re-
placed the book and pen in my pocket I felt sleepy. The
Count's warning came into my mind, but I took pleasure in
disobeying it. The sense of sleep was upon me, and with it
the obstinacy which sleep brings as outrider. The soft moon-
light soothed, and the wide expanse without gave a sense of
freedom which refreshed me. I determined not to return to-
night to the gloom-haunted rooms, but to sleep here, where,
of old, ladies had sat and sung and lived sweet lives whilst
their gentle breasts were sad for their menfolk away in the
midst of remorseless wars. I drew a great couch out of its
place near the corner, so that as I lay, I could look at the
lovely view to east and south,and unthinking of and uncaring
for the dust, composed myself for sleep. I suppose I must
have fallen asleep. I hope so, but I fear, for all that fol-
lowed was startlingly real, so real that now sitting here in
the broad, full sunlight of the morning, I cannot in the
least believe that it was all sleep.

I was not alone. The room was the same, unchanged in any
way since I came into it. I could see along the floor, in the
brilliant moonlight, my own footsteps marked where I had dis-
turbed the long accumulation of dust. In the moonlight opp-
osite me were three young women, ladies by their dress and
manner. I thought at the time that I must be dreaming when I
saw them, they threw no shadow on the floor. They came close
to me, and looked at me for some time, and then whispered
together. Two were dark, and had high aquiline noses, like
the Count, and great dark, piercing eyes, that seemed to be
almost red when contrasted with the pale yellow moon. The
other was fair,as fair as can be, with great masses of gold-
en hair and eyes like pale sapphires. I seemed somehow to
know her face, and to know it in connection with some dreamy
fear, but I could not recollect at the moment how or where.
All three had brilliant white teeth that shone like pearls
against the ruby of their voluptuous lips. There was some-
thing about them that made me uneasy, some longing and at the
same time some deadly fear. I felt in my heart a wicked, burn-
ing desire that they would kiss me with those red lips. It is
not good to note this down, lest some day it should meet
Mina's eyes and cause her pain, but it is the truth. They
whispered together, and then they all three laughed, such a
silvery, musical laugh, but as hard as though the sound never
could have come through the softness of human lips. It was
like the intolerable, tingling sweetness of waterglasses when
played on by a cunning hand. The fair girl shook her head
coquettishly, and the other two urged her on.

One said, "Go on! You are first, and we shall follow.
Yours' is the right to begin."

The other added, "He is young and strong. There are
kisses for us all."

I lay quiet, looking out from under my eyelashes in an
agony of delightful anticipation. The fair girl advanced and
bent over me till I could feel the movement of her breath
upon me. Sweet it was in one sense, honey-sweet, and sent the
same tingling through the nerves as her voice, but with a
bitter underlying the sweet, a bitter offensiveness, as one
smells in blood.

I was afraid to raise my eyelids, but looked out and saw
perfectly under the lashes. The girl went on her knees, and
bent over me, simply gloating. There was a deliberate volupt-
uousness which was both thrilling and repulsive, and as she
arched her neck she actually licked her lips like an animal,
till I could see in the moonlight the moisture shining on
the scarlet lips and on the red tongue as it lapped the
white sharp teeth. Lower and lower went her head as the lips
went below the range of my mouth and chin and seemed to
fasten on my throat. Then she paused, and I could hear the
churning sound of her tongue as it licked her teeth and lips,
and I could feel the hot breath on my neck. Then the skin of
my throat began to tingle as one's flesh does when the hand
that is to tickle it approaches nearer, nearer. I could feel
the soft, shivering touch of the lips on the super sensitive
skin of my throat, and the hard dents of two sharp teeth,
just touching and pausing there. I closed my eyes in lang-
uorous ecstasy and waited, waited with beating heart.

But at that instant, another sensation swept through me
as quick as lightning. I was conscious of the presence of the
Count, and of his being as if lapped in a storm of fury. As
my eyes opened involuntarily I saw his strong hand grasp the
slender neck of the fair woman and with giant's power draw
it back, the blue eyes transformed with fury, the white
teeth champing with rage, and the fair cheeks blazing red
with passion. But the Count! Never did I imagine such wrath
and fury, even to the demons of the pit. His eyes were pos-
itively blazing. The red light in them was lurid, as if the
flames of hell fire blazed behind them. His face was deathly
pale, and the lines of it were hard like drawn wires. The
thick eyebrows that met over the nose now seemed like a
heaving bar of white-hot metal. With a fierce sweep of his
arm, he hurled the woman from him, and then motioned to the
others, as though he were beating them back. It was the same
imperious gesture that I had seen used to the wolves. In a
voice which, though low and almost in a whisper seemed to cut
through the air and then ring in the room he said,

"How dare you touch him, any of you? How dare you cast
eyes on him when I had forbidden it? Back, I tell you all!
This man belongs to me! Beware how you meddle with him, or
you'll have to deal with me."

The fair girl, with a laugh of ribald coquetry, turned
to answer him. "You yourself never loved. You never love!" On
this the other women joined,and such a mirthless, hard, soul-
less laughter rang through the room that it almost made me
faint to hear. It seemed like the pleasure of fiends.

Then the Count turned, after looking at my face atten-
tively, and said in a soft whisper, "Yes, I too can love. You
yourselves can tell it from the past. Is it not so? Well, now
I promise you that when I am done with him you shall kiss
him at your will. Now go! Go! I must awaken him, for there is
work to be done."

"Are we to have nothing tonight?" said one of them, with
a low laugh, as she pointed to the bag which he had thrown
upon the floor, and which moved as though there were some
living thing within it. For answer he nodded his head. One
of the women jumped forward and opened it. If my ears did not
deceive me there was a gasp and a low wail, as of a half
smothered child. The women closed round, whilst I was aghast
with horror. But as I looked, they disappeared, and with them
the dreadful bag. There was no door near them, and they could
not have passed me without my noticing. They simply seemed to
fade into the rays of the moonlight and pass out through the
window, for I could see outside the dim, shadowy forms for a
moment before they entirely faded away.

Then the horror overcame me,and I sank down unconscious.





CHAPTER 4


Jonathan Harker's Journal Continued


I awoke in my own bed. If it be that I had not dreamt,
the Count must have carried me here. I tried to satisfy
myself on the subject, but could not arrive at any un-
questionable result. To be sure, there were certain small
evidences, such as that my clothes were folded and laid by
in a manner which was not my habit. My watch was still
unwound, and I am rigorously accustomed to wind it the last
thing before going to bed, and many such details. But these
things are no proof, for they may have been evidences that
my mind was not as usual, and, for some cause or another, I
had certainly been much upset. I must watch for proof. Of one
thing I am glad. If it was that the Count carried me here and
undressed me, he must have been hurried in his task, for my
pockets are intact. I am sure this diary would have been a
mystery to him which he would not have brooked. He would have
taken or destroyed it. As I look round this room, although
it has been to me so full of fear, it is now a sort of sanc-
tuary, for nothing can be more dreadful than those awful
women, who were, who are, waiting to suck my blood.


18 May.--I have been down to look at that room again in
daylight, for I must know the truth. When I got to the door-
way at the top of the stairs I found it closed. It had been
so forcibly driven against the jamb that part of the wood-
work was splintered. I could see that the bolt of the lock
had not been shot, but the door is fastened from the inside.
I fear it was no dream, and must act on this surmise.


19 May.--I am surely in the toils. Last night the Count
asked me in the sauvest tones to write three letters, one
saying that my work here was nearly done, and that I should
start for home within a few days,another that I was starting
on the next morning from the time of the letter, and the
third that I had left the castle and arrived at Bistritz. I
would fain have rebelled, but felt that in the present state
of things it would be madness to quarrel openly with the
Count whilst I am so absolutely in his power. And to refuse
would be to excite his suspicion and to arouse his anger. He
knows that I know too much, and that I must not live, lest I
be dangerous to him. My only chance is to prolong my oppor-
tunities. Something may occur which will give ma a chance to
escape. I saw in his eyes something of that gathering wrath
which was manifest when he hurled that fair woman from him.
He explained to me that posts were few and uncertain, and
that my writing now would ensure ease of mind to my friends.
And he assured me with so much impressiveness that he would
countermand the later letters, which would be held over at
Bistritz until due time in case chance would admit of my
prolonging my stay, that to oppose him would have been to
create new suspicion. I therefore pretended to fall in with
his views, and asked him what dates I should put on the
letters.

He calculated a minute, and then said, "The first
should be June 12, the second June 19,and the third June 29."

I know now the span of my life. God help me!


28 May.--There is a chance of escape, or at any rate of
being able to send word home. A band of Szgany have come to
the castle, and are encamped in the courtyard. These are
gipsies. I have notes of them in my book. They are peculiar
to this part of the world, though allied to the ordinary
gipsies all the world over. There are thousands of them in
Hungary and Transylvania, who are almost outside all law.
They attach themselves as a rule to some great noble or
boyar, and call themselves by his name. They are fearless
and without religion, save superstition, and they talk only
their own varieties of the Romany tongue.

I shall write some letters home, and shall try to get
them to have them posted. I have already spoken to them
through my window to begin acquaintanceship. They took their
hats off and made obeisance and many signs, which however, I
could not understand any more than I could their spoken
language. . .

I have written the letters. Mina's is in shorthand, and
I simply ask Mr. Hawkins to communicate with her. To her I
have explained my situation, but without the horrors which I
may only surmise. It would shock and frighten her to death
were I to expose my heart to her. Should the letters not
carry, then the Count shall not yet know my secret or the
extent of my knowledge. . .


I have given the letters. I threw them through the bars
of my window with a gold piece, and made what signs I could
to have them posted. The man who took them pressed them to
his heart and bowed, and then put them in his cap. I could
do no more. I stole back to the study, and began to read. As
the Count did not come in, I have written here. . .


The Count has come. He sat down beside me, and said in
his smoothest voice as he opened two letters, "The Szgany
has given me these, of which, though I know not whence they
come, I shall, of course, take care. See!"--He must have
looked at it.--"One is from you, and to my friend Peter
Hawkins. The other,"--here he caught sight of the strange
symbols as he opened the envelope, and the dark look came
into his face, and his eyes blazed wickedly,--"The other is
a vile thing, an outrage upon friendship and hospitality! It
is not signed. Well! So it cannot matter to us."And he calm-
ly held letter and envelope in the flame of the lamp till
they were consumed.

Then he went on, "The letter to Hawkins, that I shall,
of course send on, since it is yours. Your letters are sacred
to me. Your pardon, my friend, that unknowingly I did break
the seal. Will you not cover it again?" He held out the letter
to me, and with a courteous bow handed me a clean envelope.

I could only redirect it and hand it to him in silence.
When he went out of the room I could hear the key turn soft-
ly. A minute later I went over and tried it, and the door
was locked.

When, an hour or two after, the Count came quietly into
the room, his coming awakened me, for I had gone to sleep on
the sofa. He was very courteous and very cheery in his manner,
and seeing that I had been sleeping, he said, "So, my friend,
you are tired? Get to bed. There is the surest rest. I may
not have the pleasure of talk tonight, since there are many
labours to me, but you will sleep, I pray."

I passed to my room and went to bed, and, strange to
say, slept without dreaming. Despair has its own calms.

31 May.--This morning when I woke I thought I would
provide myself with some papers and envelopes from my bag
and keep them in my pocket, so that I might write in case I
should get an opportunity, but again a surprise, again a
shock!

Every scrap of paper was gone, and with it all my notes,
my memoranda, relating to railways and travel, my letter of
credit, in fact all that might be useful to me were I once
outside the castle. I sat and pondered awhile, and then some
thought occurred to me, and I made search of my portmanteau
and in the wardrobe where I had placed my clothes.

The suit in which I had travelled was gone, and also my
overcoat and rug. I could find no trace of them anywhere.
This looked like some new scheme of villainy. . .


17 June.--This morning, as I was sitting on the edge of
my bed cudgelling my brains, I heard without a crackling of
whips and pounding and scraping of horses' feet up the
rocky path beyond the courtyard. With joy I hurried to the
window, and saw drive into the yard two great leiter-wagons,
each drawn by eight sturdy horses, and at the head of each
pair a Slovak, with his wide hat, great nail-studded belt,
dirty sheepskin, and high boots. They had also their long
staves in hand. I ran to the door, intending to descend and
try and join them through the main hall, as I thought that
way might be opened for them. Again a shock, my door was
fastened on the outside.

Then I ran to the window and cried to them. They looked
up at me stupidly and pointed, but just then the "hetman" of
the Szgany came out, and seeing them pointing to my window,
said something, at which they laughed.

Henceforth no effort of mine, no piteous cry or agonized
entreaty, would make them even look at me. They resolutely
turned away. The leiter-wagons contained great, square boxes,
with handles of thick rope. These were evidently empty by
the ease with which the Slovaks handled them, and by their
resonance as they were roughly moved.

When they were all unloaded and packed in a great heap
in one corner of the yard, the Slovaks were given some money
by the Szgany, and spitting on it for luck, lazily went each
to his horse's head. Shortly afterwards, I heard the crack-
ling of their whips die away in the distance.


24 June.--Last night the Count left me early, and lock-
ed himself into his own room.  As soon as I dared I ran up the
winding stair, and looked out of the window, which opened
South. I thought I would watch for the Count, for there is
something going on. The Szgany are quartered somewhere in the
castle and are doing work of some kind. I know it, for now
and then, I hear a far-away muffled sound as of mattock and
spade, and, whatever it is, it must be the end of some ruth-
less villainy.

I had been at the window somewhat less than half an
hour, when I saw something coming out of the Count's window.
I drew back and watched carefully, and saw the whole man
emerge. It was a new shock to me to find that he had on the
suit of clothes which I had worn whilst travelling here, and
slung over his shoulder the terrible bag which I had seen
the women take away. There could be no doubt as to his quest,
and in my garb, too! This, then, is his new scheme of evil,
that he will allow others to see me, as they think, so that
he may both leave evidence that I have been seen in the
towns or villages posting my own letters, and that any
wickedness which he may do shall by the local people be
attributed to me.

It makes me rage to think that this can go on, and
whilst I am shut up here, a veritable prisoner, but without
that protection of the law which is even a criminal's right
and consolation.

I thought I would watch for the Count's return, and for
a long time sat doggedly at the window. Then I began to not-
ice that there were some quaint little specks floating in
the rays of the moonlight. They were like the tiniest grains
of dust,and they whirled round and gathered in clusters in a
nebulous sort of way. I watched them with a sense of soothing,
and a sort of calm stole over me. I leaned back in the embra-
sure in a more comfortable position, so that I could enjoy
more fully the aerial gambolling.

Something made me start up, a low, piteous howling of
dogs somewhere far below in the valley, which was hidden
from my sight. Louder it seemed to ring in my ears, and the
floating moats of dust to take new shapes to the sound as
they danced in the moonlight. I felt myself struggling to
awake to some call of my instincts. Nay, my very soul was
struggling, and my half-remembered sensibilities were striv-
ing to answer the call. I was becoming hypnotised!

Quicker and quicker danced the dust. The moonbeams seem-
ed to quiver as they went by me into the mass of gloom
beyond. More and more they gathered till they seemed to take
dim phantom shapes. And then I started, broad awake and in
full possession of my senses, and ran screaming from the
place.

The phantom shapes, which were becoming gradually mat-
erialised from the moonbeams, were those three ghostly women
to whom I was doomed.

I fled, and felt somewhat safer in my own room, where
there was no moonlight, and where the lamp was burning
brightly.

When a couple of hours had passed I heard something
stirring in the Count's room, something like a sharp wail
quickly suppressed. And then there was silence, deep, awful
silence, which chilled me. With a beating heart, I tried the
door, but I was locked in my prison, and could do nothing. I
sat down and simply cried.

As I sat I heard a sound in the courtyard without, the
agonised cry of a woman. I rushed to the window, and throw-
ing it up, peered between the bars.

There, indeed, was a woman with dishevelled hair, hold-
ing her hands over her heart as one distressed with running.
She was leaning against the corner of the gateway. When she
saw my face at the window she threw herself forward, and
shouted in a voice laden with menace, "Monster, give me my
child!"

She threw herself on her knees,and raising up her hands,
cried the same words in tones which wrung my heart. Then she
tore her hair and beat her breast, and abandoned herself to
all the violences of extravagant emotion. Finally, she threw
herself forward, and though I could not see her, I could hear
the beating of her naked hands against the door.

Somewhere high overhead, probably on the tower, I heard
the voice of the Count calling in his harsh, metallic whisper.
His call seemed to be answered from far and wide by the howl-
ing of wolves. Before many minutes had passed a pack of them
poured, like a pent-up dam when liberated, through the wide
entrance into the courtyard.

There was no cry from the woman, and the howling of the
wolves was but short. Before long they streamed away singly,
licking their lips.

I could not pity her, for I knew now what had become of
her child, and she was better dead.

What shall I do? What can I do? How can I escape from
this dreadful thing of night, gloom, and fear?


25 June.--No man knows till he has suffered from the
night how sweet and dear to his heart and eye the morning
can be. When the sun grew so high this morning that it
struck the top of the great gateway opposite my window, the
high spot which it touched seemed to me as if the dove from
the ark had lighted there. My fear fell from me as if it
had been a vaporous garment which dissolved in the warmth.

I must take action of some sort whilst the courage of
the day is upon me. Last night one of my post-dated letters
went to post, the first of that fatal series which is to
blot out the very traces of my existence from the earth.

Let me not think of it. Action!

It has always been at night-time that I have been mo-
lested or threatened, or in some way in danger or in fear.
I have not yet seen the Count in the daylight. Can it be
that he sleeps when others wake, that he may be awake whilst
they sleep? If I could only get into his room! But there is
no possible way. The door is always locked, no way for me.

Yes, there is a way, if one dares to take it. Where his
body has gone why may not another body go? I have seen him
myself crawl from his window. Why should not I imitate him,
and go in by his window? The chances are desperate, but my
need is more desperate still. I shall risk it. At the worst
it can only be death, and a man's death is not a calf's, and
the dreaded Hereafter may still be open to me. God help me
in my task! Goodbye, Mina, if I fail. Goodbye, my faithful
friend and second father. Goodbye, all, and last of all Mina!


Same day, later.--I have made the effort, and God help-
ing me, have come safely back to this room. I must put down
every detail in order. I went whilst my courage was fresh
straight to the window on the south side, and at once got
outside on this side. The stones are big and roughly cut, and
the mortar has by process of time been washed away between
them. I took off my boots, and ventured out on the desperate
way. I looked down once, so as to make sure that a sudden
glimpse of the awful depth would not overcome me, but after
that kept my eyes away from it. I know pretty well the direc-
tion and distance of the Count's window, and made for it as
well as I could, having regard to the opportunities available.
I did not feel dizzy, I suppose I was too excited, and the
time seemed ridiculously short till I found myself standing
on the window sill and trying to raise up the sash. I was
filled with agitation, however, when I bent down and slid
feet foremost in through the window. Then I looked around for
the Count, but with surprise and gladness, made a discovery.
The room was empty! It was barely furnished with odd things,
which seemed to have never been used.

The furniture was something the same style as that in
the south rooms, and was covered with dust. I looked for the
key, but it was not in the lock, and I could not find it any-
where. The only thing I found was a great heap of gold in
one corner, gold of all kinds, Roman, and British, and Aust-
rian,and Hungarian,and Greek and Turkish money, covered with
a film of dust, as though it had lain long in the ground.
None of it that I noticed was less than three hundred years
old. There were also chains and ornaments, some jewelled, but
all of them old and stained.

At one corner of the room was a heavy door. I tried it,
for, since I could not find the key of the room or the key
of the outer door, which was the main object of my search, I
must make further examination, or all my efforts would be
in vain. It was open, and led through a stone passage to a
circular stairway, which went steeply down.

I descended, minding carefully where I went for the
stairs were dark, being only lit by loopholes in the heavy
masonry. At the bottom there was a dark, tunnel-like pass-
age, through which came a deathly, sickly odour, the odour
of old earth newly turned. As I went through the passage
the smell grew closer and heavier. At last I pulled open
a heavy door which stood ajar, and found myself in an old
ruined chapel, which had evidently been used as a graveyard.
The roof was broken, and in two places were steps leading to
vaults, but the ground had recently been dug over, and the
earth placed in great wooden boxes, manifestly those which
had been brought by the Slovaks.

There was nobody about, and I made a search over every
inch of the ground, so as not to lose a chance. I went down
even into the vaults, where the dim light struggled,although
to do so was a dread to my very soul. Into two of these I
went, but saw nothing except fragments of old coffins and
piles of dust. In the third, however, I made a discovery.

There, in one of the great boxes, of which there were
fifty in all, on a pile of newly dug earth, lay the Count!
He was either dead or asleep. I could not say which, for eyes
were open and stony, but without the glassiness of death,and
the cheeks had the warmth of life through all their pallor.
The lips were as red as ever. But there was no sign of move-
ment, no pulse, no breath, no beating of the heart.

I bent over him, and tried to find any sign of life,
but in vain. He could not have lain there long, for the
earthy smell would have passed away in a few hours. By the
side of the box was its cover, pierced with holes here and
there. I thought he might have the keys on him, but when I
went to search I saw the dead eyes, and in them dead though
they were, such a look of hate, though unconscious of me or
my presence, that I fled from the place, and leaving the
Count's room by the window, crawled again up the castle wall.
Regaining my room, I threw myself panting upon the bed and
tried to think.


29 June.--Today is the date of my last letter, and the
Count has taken steps to prove that it was genuine, for again
I saw him leave the castle by the same window, and in my
clothes. As he went down the wall, lizard fashion, I wished
I had a gun or some lethal weapon, that I might destroy him.
But I fear that no weapon wrought along by man's hand would
have any effect on him. I dared not wait to see him return,
for I feared to see those weird sisters. I came back to the
library, and read there till I fell asleep.

I was awakened by the Count, who looked at me as grimly
as a man could look as he said, "Tomorrow, my friend, we must
part. You return to your beautiful England, I to some work
which may have such an end that we may never meet. Your lett-
er home has been despatched. Tomorrow I shall not be here,
but all shall be ready for your journey. In the morning come
the Szgany, who have some labours of their own here, and al-
so come some Slovaks. When they have gone, my carriage
shall come for you, and shall bear you to the Borgo Pass to
meet the diligence from Bukovina to Bistritz. But I am in
hopes that I shall see more of you at Castle Dracula."

I suspected him, and determined to test his sincerity.
Sincerity! It seems like a profanation of the word to write
it in connection with such a monster, so I asked him point-
blank, "Why may I not go tonight?"

"Because, dear sir, my coachman and horses are away on
a mission."

"But I would walk with pleasure. I want to get away at
once."

He smiled, such a soft, smooth, diabolical smile that I
knew there was some trick behind his smoothness. He said,
"And your baggage?"

"I do not care about it. I can send for it some other
time."

The Count stood up, and said, with a sweet courtesy
which made me rub my eyes, it seemed so real, "You English
have a saying which is close to my heart, for its spirit is
that which rules our boyars, `Welcome the coming, speed the
parting guest.' Come with me, my dear young friend. Not an
hour shall you wait in my house against your will, though sad
am I at your going,and that you so suddenly desire it. Come!"
With a stately gravity, he, with the lamp, preceded me down
the stairs and along the hall. Suddenly he stopped. "Hark!"

Close at hand came the howling of many wolves. It was
almost as if the sound sprang up at the rising of his hand,
just as the music of a great orchestra seems to leap under
the baton of the conductor. After a pause of a moment, he
proceeded, in his stately way, to the door, drew back the
ponderous bolts, unhooked the heavy chains, and began to
draw it open.

To my intense astonishment I saw that it was unlocked.
Suspiciously, I looked all round, but could see no key of
any kind.

As the door began to open, the howling of the wolves
without grew louder and angrier. Their red jaws, with champ-
ing teeth, and their blunt-clawed feet as they leaped, came
in through the opening door. I knew than that to struggle
at the moment against the Count was useless. With such allies
as these at his command, I could do nothing.

But still the door continued slowly to open, and only
the Count's body stood in the gap. Suddenly it struck me
that this might be the moment and means of my doom. I was to
be given to the wolves, and at my own instigation. There was
a diabolical wickedness in the idea great enough for the
Count, and as the last chance I cried out, "Shut the door! I
shall wait till morning." And I covered my face with my
hands to hide my tears of bitter disappointment.

With one sweep of his powerful arm, the Count threw the
door shut, and the great bolts clanged and echoed through
the hall as they shot back into their places.

In silence we returned to the library, and after a min-
ute or two I went to my own room. The last I saw of Count
Dracula was his kissing his hand to me, with a red light of
triumph in his eyes, and with a smile that Judas in hell
might be proud of.

When I was in my room and about to lie down, I thought I
heard a whispering at my door. I went to it softly and list-
ened. Unless my ears deceived me, I heard the voice of the
Count.

"Back! Back to your own place! Your time is not yet
come. Wait! Have patience! Tonight is mine. Tomorrow night
is yours!"

There was a low, sweet ripple of laughter, and in a rage
I threw open the door, and saw without the three terrible
women licking their lips. As I appeared, they all joined in
a horrible laugh, and ran away.

I came back to my room and threw myself on my knees. It
is then so near the end? Tomorrow! Tomorrow! Lord, help me,
and those to whom I am dear!


30 June.--These may be the last words I ever write in
this diary. I slept till just before the dawn, and when I
woke threw myself on my knees, for I determined that if Death
came he should find me ready.

At last I felt that subtle change in the air, and knew
that the morning had come. Then came the welcome cock-crow,
and I felt that I was safe. With a glad heart, I opened the
door and ran down the hall. I had seen that the door was
unlocked, and now escape was before me. With hands that
trembled with eagerness, I unhooked the chains and threw
back the massive bolts.

But the door would not move. Despair seized me. I
pulled and pulled at the door, and shook it till, massive as
it was, it rattled in its casement. I could see the bolt shot.
It had been locked after I left the Count.

Then a wild desire took me to obtain the key at any
risk,and I determined then and there to scale the wall again,
and gain the Count's room. He might kill me, but death now
seemed the happier choice of evils. Without a pause I rushed
up to the east window, and scrambled down the wall,as before,
into the Count's room. It was empty, but that was as I ex-
pected. I could not see a key anywhere, but the heap of gold
remained. I went through the door in the corner and down the
winding stair and along the dark passage to the old chapel. I
knew now well enough where to find the monster I sought.

The great box was in the same place, close against the
wall, but the lid was laid on it, not fastened down, but
with the nails ready in their places to be hammered home.

I knew I must reach the body for the key, so I raised
the lid, and laid it back against the wall. And then I saw
something which filled my very soul with horror. There lay
the Count, but looking as if his youth had been half restored.
For the white hair and moustache were changed to dark iron-
grey. The cheeks were fuller, and the white skin seemed
ruby-red underneath. The mouth was redder than ever, for on
the lips were gouts of fresh blood, which trickled from the
corners of the mouth and ran down over the chin and neck.
Even the deep, burning eyes seemed set amongst swollen flesh,
for the lids and pouches underneath were bloated. It seemed
as if the whole awful creature were simply gorged with blood.
He lay like a filthy leech, exhausted with his repletion.

I shuddered as I bent over to touch him,and every sense
in me revolted at the contact, but I had to search, or I was
lost. The coming night might see my own body a banquet in a
similar war to those horrid three. I felt all over the body,
but no sign could I find of the key. Then I stopped and look-
ed at the Count. There was a mocking smile on the bloated
face which seemed to drive me mad. This was the being I was
helping to transfer to London, where, perhaps, for centuries
to come he might, amongst its teeming millions, satiate his
lust for blood, and create a new and ever-widening circle of
semi-demons to batten on the helpless.

The very thought drove me mad. A terrible desire came
upon me to rid the world of such a monster. There was no
lethal weapon at hand, but I seized a shovel which the work-
men had been using to fill the cases, and lifting it high,
struck, with the edge downward, at the hateful face. But as
I did so the head turned, and the eyes fell upon me, with all
their blaze of basilisk horror. The sight seemed to paralyze
me, and the shovel turned in my hand and glanced from the
face, merely making a deep gash above the forehead. The sho-
vel fell from my hand across the box,and as I pulled it away
the flange of the blade caught the edge of the lid which
fell over again, and hid the horrid thing from my sight. The
last glimpse I had was of the bloated face, blood-stained and
fixed with a grin of malice which would have held its own in
the nethermost hell.

I thought and thought what should be my next move, but
my brain seemed on fire,and I waited with a despairing feel-
ing growing over me. As I waited I heard in the distance
a gipsy song sung by merry voices coming closer, and through
their song the rolling of heavy wheels and the cracking of
whips. The Szgany and the Slovaks of whom the Count had
spoken were coming. With a last look around and at the box
which contained the vile body, I ran from the place and
gained the Count's room, determined to rush out at the moment
the door should be opened. With strained ears, I listened,
and heard downstairs the grinding of the key in the great
lock and the falling back of the heavy door. There must
have been some other means of entry, or some one had a key
for one of the locked doors.

Then there came the sound of many feet tramping and
dying away in some passage which sent up a clanging echo. I
turned to run down again towards the vault, where I might
find the new entrance, but at the moment there seemed to
come a violent puff of wind, and the door to the winding
stair blew to with a shock that set the dust from the lint-
els flying. When I ran to push it open, I found that it
was hopelessly fast. I was again a prisoner, and the net
of doom was closing round me more closely.

As I write there is in the passage below a sound of
many tramping feet and the crash of weights being set down
heavily, doubtless the boxes, with their freight of earth.
There was a sound of hammering. It is the box being nailed
down. Now I can hear the heavy feet tramping again along
the hall, with with many other idle feet coming behind them.

The door is shut, the chains rattle. There is a grind-
ing of the key in the lock. I can hear the key withdrawn,
then another door opens and shuts. I hear the creaking of
lock and bolt.

Hark! In the courtyard and down the rocky way the
roll of heavy wheels, the crack of whips, and the chorus of
the Szgany as they pass into the distance.

I am alone in the castle with those horrible women.
Faugh! Mina is a woman, and there is nought in common. They
are devils of the Pit!

I shall not remain alone with them. I shall try to
scale the castle wall farther than I have yet attempted. I
shall take some of the gold with me, lest I want it later. I
may find a way from this dreadful place.

And then away for home! Away to the quickest and near-
est train! Away from the cursed spot, from this cursed land,
where the devil and his children still walk with earthly
feet!

At least God's mercy is better than that of those mon-
sters, and the precipice is steep and high. At its foot a
man may sleep, as a man. Goodbye, all. Mina!





CHAPTER 5


LETTER FROM MISS MINA MURRAY TO MISS LUCY WESTENRA

9 May.

My dearest Lucy,


Forgive my long delay in writing, but I have been simply
overwhelmed with work. The life of an assistant schoolmist-
ress is sometimes trying. I am longing to be with you, and
by the sea, where we can talk together freely and build our
castles in the air. I have been working very hard lately,
because I want to keep up with Jonathan's studies, and I
have been practicing shorthand very assiduously. When we are
married I shall be able to be useful to Jonathan, and if I
can stenograph well enough I can take down what he wants to
say in this way and write it out for him on the typewriter,
at which also I am practicing very hard.

He and I sometimes write letters in shorthand, and he
is keeping a stenographic journal of his travels abroad.
When I am with you I shall keep a diary in the same way. I
don't mean one of those two-pages-to-the-week-with-Sunday-
squeezed-in-a-corner diaries, but a sort of journal which
I can write in whenever I feel inclined.

I do not suppose there will be much of interest to
other people, but it is not intended for them. I may show
it to Jonathan some day if there is in it anything worth
sharing, but it is really an exercise book. I shall try to
do what I see lady journalists do, interviewing and writing
descriptions and trying to remember conversations. I am told
that, with a little practice, one can remember all that goes
on or that one hears said during a day.

However, we shall see. I will tell you of my little
plans when we meet. I have just had a few hurried lines from
Jonathan from Transylvania. He is well, and will be return-
ing in about a week. I am longing to hear all his news. It
must be nice to see strange countries. I wonder if we, I
mean Jonathan and I, shall ever see them together. There is
the ten o'clock bell ringing. Goodbye.

Your loving

Mina


Tell me all the news when you write. You have not told
me anything for a long time. I hear rumours, and especially
of a tall, handsome, curly-haired man.???



LETTER, LUCY WESTENRA TO MINA MURRAY



17, Chatham Street

Wednesday

My dearest Mina,


I must say you tax me very unfairly with being a bad
correspondent. I wrote you twice since we parted, and your
last letter was only your second. Besides, I have nothing
to tell you. There is really nothing to interest you.

Town is very pleasant just now, and we go a great deal
to picture-galleries and for walks and rides in the park. As
to the tall, curly-haired man, I suppose it was the one who
was with me at the last Pop. Someone has evidently been
telling tales.

That was Mr. Holmwood. He often comes to see us, and
he and Mamma get on very well together, they have so many
things to talk about in common.

We met some time ago a man that would just do for you,
if you were not already engaged to Jonathan. He is an
excellant parti, being handsome, well off, and of good birth.
He is a doctor and really clever. Just fancy! He is only
nine-and twenty, and he has an immense lunatic asylum all
under his own care. Mr. Holmwood introduced him to me, and
he called here to see us, and often comes now. I think he
is one of the most resolute men I ever saw, and yet the most
calm. He seems absolutely imperturbable. I can fancy what
a wonderful power he must have over his patients. He has a
curious habit of looking one straight in the face, as if
trying to read one's thoughts. He tries this on very much
with me, but I flatter myself he has got a tough nut to crack.
I know that from my glass.

Do you ever try to read your own face? I do, and I can
tell you it is not a bad study, and gives you more trouble
than you can well fancy if you have never tried it.

He say that I afford him a curious psychological study,
and I humbly think I do. I do not, as you know, take suff-
icient interest in dress to be able to describe the new
fashions. Dress is a bore. That is slang again, but never
mind. Arthur says that every day.

There, it is all out, Mina, we have told all our secrets
to each other since we were children. We have slept together
and eaten together, and laughed and cried together, and now,
though I have spoken, I would like to speak more. Oh, Mina,
couldn't you guess? I love him. I am blushing as I write,
for although I think he loves me, he has not told me so in
words. But, oh, Mina, I love him. I love him! There, that
does me good.

I wish I were with you, dear, sitting by the fire un-
dressing, as we used to sit, and I would try to tell you
what I feel. I do not know how I am writing this even to
you. I am afraid to stop, or I should tear up the letter,
and I don't want to stop, for I do so want to tell you all.
Let me hear from you at once, and tell me all that you think
about it. Mina, pray for my happiness.

Lucy


P.S.--I need not tell you this is a secret. Goodnight
again. L.




LETTER, LUCY WESTENRA TO MINA MURRAY

24 May

My dearest Mina,


Thanks, and thanks, and thanks again for your sweet
letter. It was so nice to be able to tell you and to have
your sympathy.

My dear, it never rains but it pours. How true the old
proverbs are. Here am I, who shall be twenty in September,
and yet I never had a proposal till today, not a real pro-
posal, and today I had three. Just fancy! Three proposals
in one day! Isn't it awful! I feel sorry, really and truly
sorry, for two of the poor fellows. Oh, Mina, I am so happy
that I don't know what to do with myself. And three propos-
als! But, for goodness' sake, don't tell any of the girls,
or they would be getting all sorts of extravagant ideas, and
imagining themselves injured and slighted if in their very
first day at home they did not get six at least. Some girls
are so vain! You and I, Mina dear, who are engaged and are
going to settle down soon soberly into old married women,
can despise vanity. Well, I must tell you about the three,
but you must keep it a secret, dear, from every one except,
of course, Jonathan. You will tell him, because I would, if
I were in your place, certainly tell Arthur. A woman ought
to tell her husband everything. Don't you think so, dear?
And I must be fair. Men like women, certainly their wives,
to be quite as fair as they are. And women, I am afraid, are
not always quite as fair as they should be.

Well, my dear, number One came just before lunch. I
told you of him, Dr. John Seward, the lunatic asylum man,
with the strong jaw and the good forehead. He was very cool
outwardly, but was nervous all the same. He had evidently
been schooling himself as to all sorts of little things, and
remembered them, but he almost managed to sit down on his
silk hat, which men don't generally do when they are cool,
and then when he wanted to appear at ease he kept playing
with a lancet in a way that made me nearly scream. He spoke
to me, Mina, very straightfordwardly. He told me how dear I
was to him, though he had known me so little, and what his
life would be with me to help and cheer him. He was going to
tell me how unhappy he would be if I did not care for him,
but when he saw me cry he said he was a brute and would not
add to my present trouble. Then he broke off and asked if I
could love him in time, and when I shook my head his hands
trembled, and then with some hesitation he asked me if I
cared already for any one else. He put it very nicely, saying
that he did not want to wring my confidence from me, but on-
ly to know, because if a woman's heart was free a man might
have hope. And then, Mina, I felt a sort of duty to tell
him that there was some one. I only told him that much, and
then he stood up, and he looked very strong and very grave
as he took both my hands in his and said he hoped I would be
happy, and that If I ever wanted a friend I must count him
one of my best.

Oh, Mina dear, I can't help crying, and you must excuse
this letter being all blotted. Being proposed to is all very
nice and all that sort of thing, but it isn't at all a happy
thing when you have to see a poor fellow, whom you know loves
you honestly, going away and looking all broken hearted, and
to know that, no matter what he may say at the moment, you
are passing out of his life. My dear, I must stop here at
present, I feel so miserable, though I am so happy.

Evening.


Arthur has just gone, and I feel in better spirits than
when I left off, so I can go on telling you about the day.

Well, my dear, number Two came after lunch. He is such
a nice fellow,and American from Texas, and he looks so young
and so fresh that it seems almost impossible that he has
been to so many places and has such adventures. I sympathize
with poor Desdemona when she had such a stream poured in her
ear, even by a black man. I suppose that we women are such
cowards that we think a man will save us from fears, and we
marry him. I know now what I would do if I were a man and
wanted to make a girl love me. No, I don't, for there was
Mr. Morris telling us his stories, and Arthur never told any,
and yet. . .

My dear, I am somewhat previous. Mr. Quincy P. Morris
found me alone. It seems that a man always does find a girl
alone. No, he doesn't, for Arthur tried twice to make a
chance, and I helping him all I could, I am not ashamed to
say it now. I must tell you beforehand that Mr. Morris does-
n't always speak slang, that is to say, he never does so to
strangers or before them, for he is really well educated and
has exquisite manners, but he found out that it amused me to
hear him talk American slang,and whenever I was present, and
there was no one to be shocked, he said such funny things. I
am afraid, my dear, he has to invent it all, for it fits
exactly into whatever else he has to say. But this is a way
slang has. I do not know myself if I shall ever speak slang.
I do not know if Arthur likes it, as I have never heard him
use any as yet.

Well, Mr. Morris sat down beside me and looked as happy
and jolly as he could, but I could see all the same that he
was very nervous. He took my hand in his, and said ever so
sweetly. . .

"Miss Lucy, I know I ain't good enough to regulate the
fixin's of your little shoes, but I guess if you wait till
you find a man that is you will go join them seven young wo-
men with the lamps when you quit. Won't you just hitch up
along-side of me and let us go down the long road together,
driving in double harness?"

Well, he did look so hood humoured and so jolly that it
didn't seem half so hard to refuse him as it did poor Dr.
Seward. So I said, as lightly as I could, that I did not
know anything of hitching, and that I wasn't broken to harn-
ess at all yet. Then he said that he had spoken in a light
manner, and he hoped that if he had made a mistake in doing
so on so grave, so momentous, and occasion for him, I would
forgive him. He really did look serious when he was saying
it, and I couldn't help feeling a sort of exultation that he
was number Two in one day. And then, my dear, before I could
say a word he began pouring out a perfect torrent of love-
making, laying his very heart and soul at my feet. He looked
so earnest over it that I shall never again think that a man
must be playful always, and never earnest, because he is
merry at times. I suppose he saw something in my face which
checked him, for he suddenly stopped,and said with a sort of
manly fervour that I could have loved him for if I had been
free. . .

"Lucy, you are an honest hearted girl, I know. I should
not be here speaking to you as I am now if I did not believe
you clean grit, right through to the very depths of your soul.
Tell me, like one good fellow to another, is there any one
else that you care for? And if there is I'll never trouble
you a hair's breadth again, but will be, if you will let me,
a very faithful friend."

My dear Mina, why are men so noble when we women are so
little worthy of them? Here was I almost making fun of this
great hearted, true gentleman. I burst into tears, I am
afraid, my dear, you will think this a very sloppy letter in
more ways than one, and I really felt very badly.

Why can't they let a girl marry three men, or as many as
want her, and save all this trouble? But this is heresy, and
I must not say it. I am glad to say that, though I was cry-
ing, I was able to look into Mr. Morris' brave eyes, and I
told him out straight. . .

"Yes, there is some one I love, though he has not told
me yet that he even loves me." I was right to speak to him
so frankly, for quite a light came into his face, and he put
out both his hands and took mine, I think I put them into
his, and said in a hearty way. . .

"That's my brave girl. It's better worth being late for
a chance of winning you than being in time for any other
girl in the world. Don't cry, my dear. If it's for me, I'm
a hard nut to crack, and I take it standing up. If that
other fellow doesn't know his happiness, well, he'd better
look for it soon, or he'll have to deal with me. Little girl,
your honesty and pluck have made me a friend, and that's
rarer than a lover, it's more selfish anyhow. My dear, I'm
going to have a pretty lonely walk between this and Kingdom
Come. Won't you give me one kiss? It'll be something to keep
off the darkness now and then. You can, you know, if you
like, for that other good fellow, or you could not love him,
hasn't spoken yet."

That quite won me, Mina, for it was brave and sweet of
him, and noble too, to a rival, wasn't it? And he so sad,
so I leant over and kissed him.

He stood up with my two hands in his, and as he looked
down into my face, I am afraid I was blushing very much, he
said, "Little girl, I hold your hand, and you've kissed me,
and if these things don't make us friends nothing ever will.
Thank you for your sweet honesty to me, and goodbye."

He wrung my hand, and taking up his hat, went straight
out of the room without looking back, without a tear or a
quiver or a pause, and I am crying like a baby.

Oh, why must a man like that be made unhappy when there
are lots of girls about who would worship the very ground he
trod on? I know I would if I were free, only I don't want
to be free My dear, this quite upset me, and I feel I
cannot write of happiness just at once, after telling you of
it,and I don't wish to tell of the number Three until it can
be all happy. Ever your loving. . .

Lucy


P.S.--Oh, about number Three, I needn't tell you of
number Three, need I? Besides, it was all so confused. It
seemed only a moment from his coming into the room till both
his arms were round me, and he was kissing me. I am very,
very happy, and I don't know what I have done to deserve it.
I must only try in the future to show that I am not ungrate-
ful to God for all His goodness to me in sending to me such
a lover, such a husband, and such a friend.

Goodbye.

DR. SEWARD'S DIARY
(Kept in phonograph)


25 May.--Ebb tide in appetite today. Cannot eat, can-
not rest, so diary instead. since my rebuff of yesterday I
have a sort of empty feeling. Nothing in the world seems of
sufficient importance to be worth the doing. As I knew that
the only cure for this sort of thing was work, I went amongst
the patients. I picked out one who has afforded me a study
of much interest. He is so quaint that I am determined to
understand him as well as I can. Today I seemed to get nearer
than ever before to the heart of his mystery.

I questioned him more fully than I had ever done, with
a view to making myself master of the facts of his halluci-
nation. In my manner of doing it there was, I now see, some-
thing of cruelty. I seemed to wish to keep him to the point
of his madness, a thing which I avoid with the patients as I
would the mouth of hell.

(Mem., Under what circumstances would I not avoid the
pit of hell?) Omnia Romae venalia sunt. Hell has its price!
If there be anything behind this instinct it will be valu-
able to trace it afterwards accurately, so I had better
commence to do so, therefore. . .

R. M, Renfield, age 59. Sanguine temperament, great
physical strength, morbidly excitable, periods of gloom, end-
ing in some fixed idea which I cannot make out. I presume
that the sanguine temperament itself and the disturbing in-
fluence end in a mentally-accomplished finish, a possibly
dangerous man, probably dangerous if unselfish. In selfish
men caution is as secure an armour for their foes as for
themselves. What I think of on this point is, when self is
the fixed point the centripetal force is balanced with the
centrifugal. When duty, a cause, etc., is the fixed point,
the latter force is paramount, and only accident of a series
of accidents can balance it.


LETTER, QUINCEY P. MORRIS TO HON. ARTHUR HOLMOOD


25 May.

My dear Art,

We've told yarns by the campfire in the prairies, and
dressed one another's wounds after trying a landing at the
Marquesas, and drunk healths on the shore of Titicaca. There
are more yarns to be told,and other wounds to be healed, and
another health to be drunk. Won't you let this be at my
campfire tomorrow night? I have no hesitation in asking you,
as I know a certain lady is engaged to a certain dinner
party, and that you are free. There will only be one other,
our old pal at the Korea, Jack Seward. He's coming, too, and
we both want to mingle our weeps over the wine cup, and to
drink a health with all our hearts to the happiest man in
all the wide world, who has won the noblest heart that God
has made and best worth winning. We promise you a hearty
welcome, and a loving greeting, and a health as true as your
own right hand. We shall both swear to leave you at home if
you drink too deep to a certain pair of eyes. Come!

Yours, as ever and always,

Quincey P. Morris





TELEGRAM FROM ARTHUR HOLMWOOD TO QUINCEY P. MORRIS

26 May


Count me in every time. I bear messages which will
make both your ears tingle.

Art





CHAPTER 6


MINA MURRAY'S JOURNAL


24 July. Whitby.--Lucy met me at the station, looking
sweeter and lovlier than ever, and we drove up to the house
at the Crescent in which they have rooms. This is a lovely
place. The little river, the Esk, runs through a deep vall-
ey, which broadens out as it comes near the harbour. A great
viaduct runs across, with high piers, through which the view
seems somehow further away than it really is. The valley is
beautifully green, and it is so steep that when you are on
the high land on either side you look right across it, un-
less you are near enough to see down. The houses of the old
town--the side away from us, are all red-roofed, and seem
piled up one over the other anyhow, like the pictures we see
of Nuremberg. Right over the town is the ruin of Whitby Abb-
ey, which was sacked by the Danes, and which is the scene of
part of "Marmion," where the girl was built up in the wall.
It is a most noble ruin, of immense size, and full of beaut-
iful and romantic bits. There is a legend that a white lady
is seen in one of the windows. Between it and the town there
is another church, the parish one, round which is a big
graveyard, all full of tombstones. This is to my mind the
nicest spot in Whitby, for it lies right over the town, and
has a full view of the harbour and all up the bay to where
the headland called Kettleness stretches out into the sea. It
descends so steeply over the harbour that part of the bank
has fallen away, and some of the graves have been destroyed.

In one place part of the stonework of the graves stret-
ches out over the sandy pathway far below. There are walks,
with seats beside them, through the churchyard, and people
go and sit there all day long looking at the beautiful view
and enjoying the breeze.

I shall come and sit here often myself and work. Indeed,
I am writing now, with my book on my knee, and listening to
the talk of three old men who are sitting beside me. They
seem to do nothing all day but sit here and talk.

The harbour lies below me, with, on the far side, one
long granite wall stretching out into the sea, with a curve
outwards at the end of it, in the middle of which is a light-
house. A heavy seawall runs along outside of it. On the
near side, the seawall makes an elbow crooked inversely, and
its end too has a lighthouse. Between the two piers there
is a narrow opening into the harbour, which then suddenly
widens.

It is nice at high water, but when the tide is out it
shoals away to nothing,and there is merely the stream of the
Esk, running between banks of sand, with rocks here and
there. Outside the harbour on this side there rises for a-
bout half a mile a great reef, the sharp of which runs
straight out from behind the south lighthouse. At the end of
it is a buoy with a bell, which swings in bad weather, and
sends in a mournful sound on the wind.

They have a legend here that when a ship is lost bells
are heard out at sea. I must ask the old man about this. He
is coming this way. . .

He is a funny old man. He must be awfully old, for his
face is gnarled and twisted like the bark of a tree. He tells
me that he is nearly a hundred, and that he was a sailor in
the Greenland fishing fleet when Waterloo was fought. He is,
I am afraid, a very sceptical person, for when I asked him
about the bells at sea and the White Lady at the abbey he
said very brusquely,

"I wouldn't fash masel' about them, miss. Them things
be all wore out. Mind, I don't say that they never was, but
I do say that they wasn't in my time. They be all very well
for comers and trippers, an' the like, but not for a nice
young lady like you. Them feet-folks from York and Leeds
that be always eatin'cured herrin's and drinkin' tea an'
lookin' out to buy cheap jet would creed aught. I wonder
masel' who'd be bothered tellin' lies to them, even the
newspapers, which is full of fool-talk."

I thought he would be a good person to learn interest-
ing things from, so I asked him if he would mind telling me
something about the whale fishing in the old days. He was
just settling himself to begin when the clock struck six,
whereupon he laboured to get up, and said,

"I must gang ageeanwards home now, miss. My grand-
daughter doesn't like to be kept waitin' when the tea is
ready, for it takes me time to crammle aboon the grees, for
there be a many of `em, and miss, I lack belly-timber sairly
by the clock."

He hobbled away, and I could see him hurrying, as well
as he could, down the steps. The steps are a great feature
on the place. They lead from the town to the church, there
are hundreds of them, I do not know how many, and they wind
up in a delicate curve. The slope is so gentle that a horse
could easily walk up and down them.

I think they must originally have had something to do
with the abbey. I shall go home too. Lucy went out, visit-
ing with her mother, and as they were only duty calls, I did
not go.


1 August.--I came up here an hour ago with Lucy, and we
had a most interesting talk with my old friend and the two
others who always come and join him. He is evidently the Sir
Oracle of them,and I should think must have been in his time
a most dictatorial person.

He will not admit anything, and down faces everybody. If
he can't out-argue them he bullies them,and then takes their
silence for agreement with his views.

Lucy was looking sweetly pretty in her white lawn frock.
She has got a beautiful colour since she has been here.

I noticed that the old men did not lose any time in
coming and sitting near her when we sat down. She is so sweet
with old people, I think they all fell in love with her on
the spot. Even my old man succumbed and did not contradict
her, but gave me double share instead. I got him on the sub-
ject of the legends , and he went off at once into a sort of
sermon. I must try to remember it and put it down.

"It be all fool-talk, lock, stock, and barrel, that's
what it be and nowt else. These bans an' wafts an' boh-ghosts
an' bar-guests an' bogles an' all anent them is only fit to
set bairns an' dizzy women a'belderin'. They be nowt but
air-blebs. They, an' all grims an' signs an' warnin's, be
all invented by parsons an' illsome berk-bodies an' railway
touters to skeer an' scunner hafflin's, an' to get folks to
do somethin' that they don't other incline to. It makes me
ireful to think o' them. Why, it's them that, not content
with printin' lies on paper an' preachin' them ou t of
pulpits, does want to be cuttin' them on the tombstones. Look
here all around you in what airt ye will. All them steans,
holdin' up their heads as well as they can out of their
pride, is acant, simply tumblin' down with the weight o' the
lies wrote on them, `Here lies the body' or `Sacred to the
memory' wrote on all of them, an' yet in nigh half of them
there bean't no bodies at all, an' the memories of them
bean't cared a pinch of snuff about, much less sacred. Lies
all of them, nothin' but lies of one kind or another! My gog,
but it'll be a quare scowderment at the Day of Judgment when
they come tumblin' up in their death-sarks, all jouped toge-
ther an' trying' to drag their tombsteans with them to prove
how good they was, some of them trimmlin' an' dithering, with
their hands that dozzened an' slippery from lyin' in the sea
that they can't even keep their gurp o' them."

I could see from the old fellow's self-satisfied air
and the way in which he looked round for the approval of his
cronies that he was "showing off," so I put in a word to
keep him going.

"Oh, Mr. Swales, you can't be serious. Surely these
tombstones are not all wrong?"

"Yabblins! There may be a poorish few not wrong, savin'
where they make out the people too good, for there be folk
that do think a balm-bowl be like the sea, if only it be
their own. The whole thing be only lies. Now look you here.
You come here a stranger, an' you see this kirkgarth."

I nodded, for I thought it better to assent, though I
did not quite understand his dialect. I knew it had some-
thing to do with the church.

He went on, "And you consate that all these steans be
aboon folk that be haped here, snod an' snog?" I assented
again. "Then that be just where the lie comes in. Why,
there be scores of these laybeds that be toom as old Dun's
`baccabox on Friday night."

He nudged one of his companions, and they all laughed.
"And, my gog! How could they be otherwise? Look at that
one, the aftest abaft the bier-bank, read it!"

I went over and read, "Edward Spencelagh, master marin-
er, murdered by pirates off the coast of Andres, April, 1854,
age 30." When I came back Mr. Swales went on,

"Who brought him home, I wonder, to hap him here? Murd-
ered off the coast of Andres! An' you consated his body lay
under! Why, I could name ye a dozen whose bones lie in the
Greenland seas above," he pointed northwards, "or where the
currants may have drifted them. There be the steans around
ye. Ye can, with your young eyes, read the small print of
the lies from here. This Braithwaite Lowery, I knew his
father, lost in the Lively off Greenland in `20, or Andrew
Woodhouse, drowned in the same seas in 1777, or John Paxton,
drowned off Cape Farewell a year later, or old John Rawlings,
whose grandfather sailed with me, drowned in the Gulf of
Finland in `50. Do ye think that all these men will have to
make a rush to Whitby when the trumpet sounds? I have me
antherums aboot it! I tell ye that when they got here they'd
be jommlin' and jostlin' one another that way that it `ud be
like a fight up on the ice in the old days, when we'd be
at one another from daylight to dark, an' tryin' to tie up
our cuts by the aurora borealis." This was evidently local
pleasantry, for the old man cackled over it, and his cronies
joined in with gusto.

"But," I said, "surely you are not quite correct, for
you start on the assumption that all the poor people, or
their spirits, will have to take their tombstones with them
on the Day of Judgment. Do you think that will be really
necessary?"

"Well, what else be they tombstones for? Answer me
that, miss!"

"To please their relatives, I suppose."

"To please their relatives, you suppose!" This he said
with intense scorn. "How will it pleasure their relatives to
know that lies is wrote over them, and that everybody in the
place knows that they be lies?"

He pointed to a stone at our feet which had been laid
down as a slab, on which the seat was rested, close to the
edge of the cliff. "Read the lies on that thruff-stone," he
said.

The letters were upside down to me from where I sat, but
Lucy was more opposite to them, so she leant over and read,
"Sacred to the memory of George Canon, who died, in the hope
of a glorious resurrection, on July 29,1873, falling from the
rocks at Kettleness. This tomb was erected by his sorrowing
mother to her dearly beloved son.`He was the only son of his
mother, and she was a widow.' Really, Mr. Swales, I don't
see anything very funny in that!" She spoke her comment very
gravely and somewhat severely.

"Ye don't see aught funny! Ha-ha! But that's because ye
don't gawm the sorrowin'mother was a hell-cat that hated him
because he was acrewk'd, a regular lamiter he was, an' he
hated her so that he committed suicide in order that she
mightn't get an insurance she put on his life. He blew nigh
the top of his head off with an old musket that they had for
scarin' crows with. `twarn't for crows then, for it brought
the clegs and the dowps to him. That's the way he fell off
the rocks. And, as to hopes of a glorious resurrection, I've
often heard him say masel' that he hoped he'd go to hell, for
his mother was so pious that she'd be sure to go to heaven,
an' he didn't want to addle where she was. Now isn't that
stean at any rate," he hammered it with his stick as he spoke,
"a pack of lies? And won't it make Gabriel keckle when
Geordie comes pantin' ut the grees with the tompstean balan-
ced on his hump, and asks to be took as evidence!"

I did not know what to say, but Lucy turned the conver-
sation as she said, rising up, "Oh, why did you tell us of
this? It is my favorite seat, and I cannot leave it, and now
I find I must go on sitting over the grave of a suicide."

"That won't harm ye, my pretty, an' it may make poor
Geordie gladsome to have so trim a lass sittin' on his lap.
That won't hurt ye. Why, I've sat here off an' on for nigh
twenty years past, an' it hasn't done me no harm. Don't ye
fash about them as lies under ye, or that doesn' lie there
either! It'll be time for ye to be getting scart when ye see
the tombsteans all run away with, and the place as bare as a
stubble-field. There's the clock, and'I must gang. My service
to ye, ladies!" And off he hobbled.

Lucy and I sat awhile, and it was all so beautiful be-
fore us that we took hands as we sat, and she told me all
over again about Arthur and their coming marriage. That made
me just a little heart-sick, for I haven't heard from Jona-
than for a whole month.


The same day. I came up here alone, for I am very sad.
There was no letter for me. I hope there cannot be anything
the matter with Jonathan. The clock has just struck nine. I
see the lights scattered all over the town, sometimes in rows
where the streets are, and sometimes singly. They run right
up the Esk and die away in the curve of the valley. To my
left the view is cut off by a black line of roof of the old
house next to the abbey. The sheep and lambs are bleating in
the fields away behind me, and there is a clatter of donkeys'
hoofs up the paved road below. The band on the pier is play-
ing a harsh waltz in good time, and further along the quay
there is a Salvation Army meeting in a back street. Neither
of the bands hears the other, but up here I hear and see
them both. I wonder where Jonathan is and if he is thinking
of me! I wish he were here.


DR. SEWARD'S DIARY

5 June.--The case of Renfield grows more interesting the
more I get to understand the man. He has certain qualities
very largely developed, selfishness, secrecy, and purpose.

I wish I could get at what is the object of the latter.
He seems to have some settled scheme of his own, but what it
is I do not know. His redeeming quality is a love of animals,
though, indeed, he has such curious turns in it that I some-
times imagine he is only abnormally cruel. His pets are of
odd sorts.

Just now his hobby is catching flies. He has at pre-
sent such a quantity that I have had myself to expostulate.
To my astonishment, he did not break out into a fury, as I
expected, but took the matter in simple seriousness. He
thought for a moment, and then said, "May I have three days?
I shall clear them away." Of course, I said that would do.
I must watch him.


18 June.--He has turned his mind now to spiders,and has
got several very big fellows in a box. He keeps feeding them
his flies, and the number of the latter is becoming sensibly
diminished, although he has used half his food in attracting
more flies from outside to his room.


1 July.--His spiders are now becoming as great a nui-
sance as his flies, and today I told him that he must get
rid of them.

He looked very sad at this, so I said that he must some
of them, at all events. He cheerfully acquiesced in this,
and I gave him the same time as before for reduction.

He disgusted me much while with him, for when a horrid
blowfly, bloated with some carrion food, buzzed into the
room, he caught it, held it exultantly for a few moments be-
tween his finger and thumb, and before I knew what he was
going to do, put it in his mouth and ate it.

I scolded him for it, but he argued quietly that it was
very good and very wholesome, that it was life, strong life,
and gave life to him. This gave me an idea, or the rudiment
of one. I must watch how he gets rid of his spiders.

He has evidently some deep problem in his mind, for he
keeps a little notebook in which he is always jotting down
something. whole pages of it are filled with masses of fig-
ures, generally single numbers added up in batches, and then
the totals added in batches again, as though he were focuss-
ing some account, as the auditors put it.


8 July.--There is a method in his madness,and the rudi-
mentary idea in my mind is growing. It will be a whole idea
soon, and then, oh, unconscious cerebration, you will have
to give the wall to your conscious brother.

I kept away from my friend for a few days, so that I
might notice if there were any change. Things remain as they
were except that he has parted with some of his pets and got
a new one.

He has managed to get a sparrow, and has already par-
tially tamed it. His means of taming is simple, for already
the spiders have diminshed. Those that do remain, however,
are well fed, for he still brings in the flies by tempting
them with his food.

19 July--We are progressing. My friend has now a whole
colony of sparrows, and his flies and spiders are almost ob-
literated. When I came in he ran to me and said he wanted
to ask me a great favour, a very, very great favour. And as
he spoke, he fawned on me like a dog.

I asked him what it was, and he said, with a sort of
rapture in his voice and bearing, "A kitten, a nice, little,
sleek playful kitten, that I can play with, and teach, and
feed, and feed, and feed!"

I was not unprepared for this request, for I had noticed
how his pets went on increasing in size and vivacity, but I
did not care that his pretty family of tame sparrows should
be wiped out in the same manner as the flies and spiders.
So I said I would see about it, and asked him if he would
not rather have a cat than a kitten.

His eagerness betrayed him as he answered, "Oh, yes, I
would like a cat! I only asked for a kitten lest you should
refuse me a cat. No one would refuse me a kitten, would
they?"

I shook my head, and said that at present I feared it
would not be possible, but that I would see about it. His
face fell, and I could see a warning of danger in it, for
there was a sudden fierce, sidelong look which meant killing.
The man is an undeveloped homicidal maniac. I shall test
him with his present craving and see how it will work out,
then I shall know more.


10 pm.--I have visited him again and found him sitting
in a corner brooding. When I came in he threw himself on
his knees before me and implored me to let him have a cat,
that his salvation depended upon it.

I was firm, however, and told him that he could not
have it, whereupon he went without a word, and sat down,
gnawing his fingers, in the corner where I had found him. I
shall see him in the morning early.


20 July.--Visited Renfield very early, before attendant
went his rounds. Found him up and humming a tune. He was
spreading out his sugar, which he had saved, in the window,
and was manifestly beginning his fly catching again, and be-
ginning it cheerfully and with a good grace.

I looked around for his birds,and not seeing them,asked
him where they were. He replied, without turning round, that
they had all flown away. There were a few feathers about the
room and on his pillow a drop of blood. I said nothing, but
went and told the keeper to report to me if there were any-
thing odd about him during the day.


11 am.--The attendant has just been to see me to say
that Renfield has been very sick and has disgorged a whole
lot of feathers. "My belief is, doctor," he said, "that he
has eaten his birds, and that he just took and ate them raw!"


11 pm.--I gave Renfield a strong opiate tonight, enough
to make even him sleep, and took away his pocketbook to look
at it. The thought that has been buzzing about my brain
lately is complete, and the theory proved.

My homicidal maniac is of a peculiar kind. I shall have
to invent a new classification for him, and call him a zoo-
phagous (life-eating) maniac. What he desires is to absorb
as many lives as he can, and he has laid himself out to ac-
hieve it in a cumulative way. He gave many flies to one
spider and many spiders to one bird, and then wanted a cat
to eat the many birds. What would have been his later steps?

It would almost be worth while to complete the exper-
iment. It might be done if there were only a sufficient
cause. Men sneered at vivisection, and yet look at its re-
sults today! Why not advance science in its most difficult
and vital aspect, the knowledge of the brain?

Had I even the secret of one such mind, did I hold the
key to the fancy of even one lunatic, I might advance my own
branch of science to a pitch compared with which Burdon-
Sanderson's physiology or Ferrier's brain knowledge would be
as nothing. If only there were a sufficient cause! I must
not think too much of this, or I may be tempted. A good
cause might turn the scale with me, for may not I too be of
an exceptional brain, congenitally?

How well the man reasoned. Lunatics always do within
their own scope. I wonder at how many lives he values a man,
or if at only one. He has closed the account most accurately,
and today begun a new record. How many of us begin a new
record with each day of our lives?

To me it seems only yesterday that my whole life ended
with my new hope, and that truly I began a new record. So it
shall be until the Great Recorder sums me up and closes my
ledger account with a balance to profit or loss.

Oh, Lucy, Lucy, I cannot be angry with you, nor can I be
angry with my friend whose happiness is yours, but I must
only wait on hopeless and work. Work! Work!

If I could have as strong a cause as my poor mad friend
there, a good, unselfish cause to make me work, that would
be indeed happiness.


MINA MURRAY'S JOURNAL


26 July.--I am anxious,and it soothes me to express my-
self here. It is like whispering to one's self and listening
at the same time. And there is also something about the
shorthand symbols that makes it different from writing. I am
unhappy about Lucy and about Jonathan. I had not heard from
Jonathan for some time, and was very concerned, but yesterday
dear Mr. Hawkins, who is always so kind, sent me a letter
from him. I had written asking him if he had heard, and he
said the enclosed had just been received. It is only a line
dated from Castle Dracula, and says that he is just starting
for home. That is not like Jonathan. I do not understand it,
and it makes me uneasy.

Then, too, Lucy , although she is so well, has lately
taken to her old habit of walking in her sleep. Her mother
has spoken to me about it, and we have decided that I am to
lock the door of our room every night.

Mrs. Westenra has got an idea that sleep-walkers always
go out on roofs of houses and along the edges of cliffs and
then get suddenly wakened and fall over with a despairing
cry that echoes all over the place.

Poor dear, she is naturally anxious about Lucy, and she
tells me that her husband, Lucy's father, had the same habit,
that he would get up in the night and dress himself and go
out, if he were not stopped.

Lucy is to be married in the autumn, and she is already
planning out her dresses and how her house is to be arranged.
I sympathise with her, for I do the same, only Jonathan and
I will start in life in a very simple way, and shall have to
try to make both ends meet.

Mr. Holmwood, he is the Hon. Arthur Holmwood, only son
of Lord Godalming, is coming up here very shortly, as soon as
he can leave town, for his father is not very well, and I
think dear Lucy is counting the moments till he comes.

She wants to take him up in the seat on the churchyard
cliff and show him the beauty of Whitby. I daresay it is the
waiting which disturbs her. She will be all right when he
arrives.


27 July.--No news from Jonathan. I am getting quite un-
easy about him, though why I should I do not know, but I do
wish that he would write, if it were only a single line.

Lucy walks more than ever, and each night I am awakened
by her moving about the room. Fortunately, the weather is so
hot that she cannot get cold. But still, the anxiety and the
perpetually being awakened is beginning to tell on me, and I
am getting nervous and wakeful myself. Thank God, Lucy's
health keeps up. Mr. Holmwood has been suddenly called to
Ring to see his father, who has been taken seriously ill.
Lucy frets at the postponement of seeing him, but it does
not touch her looks. She is a trifle stouter, and her cheeks
are a lovely rose-pink. She has lost the anemic look which
she had. I pray it will all last.


3 August.--Another week gone by, and no news from Jona-
than, not even to Mr. Hawkins, from whom I have heard. Oh,
I do hope he is not ill. He surely would have written. I
look at that last letter of his, but somehow it does not
satisfy me. It does not read like him, and yet it is his
writing. There is no mistake of that.

Lucy has not walked much in her sleep the last week, but
there is an odd concentration about her which I do not under-
stand, even in her sleep she seems to be watching me. She
tries the door, and finding it locked, goes about the room
searching for the key.


6 August.--Another three days, and no news. This sus-
pense is getting dreadful. If I only knew where to write to
or where to go to, I should feel easier. But no one has
heard a word of Jonathan since that last letter. I must
only pray to God for patience.

Lucy is more excitable than ever, but is otherwise well.
Last night was very threatening, and the fishermen say that
we are in for a storm. I must try to watch it and learn the
weather signs.

Today is a gray day,and the sun as I write is hidden in
thick clouds, high over Kettleness. Everything is gray except
the green grass, which seems like emerald amongst it, gray
earthy rock, gray clouds, tinged with the sunburst at the far
edge, hang over the gray sea, into which the sandpoints
stretch like gray figures. The sea is tumbling in over the
shallows and the sandy flats with a roar, muffled in the
sea-mists drifting inland. The horizon is lost in a gray
mist. All vastness, the clouds are piled up like giant
rocks, and there is a `brool' over the sea that sounds like
some passage of doom. Dark figures are on the beach here and
there, sometimes half shrouded in the mist, and seem `men
like trees walking'. The fishing boats are racing for home,
and rise and dip in the ground swell as they sweep into the
harbour, bending to the scuppers. Here comes old Mr. Swales.
He is making straight for me, and I can see, by the way he
lifts his hat, that he wants to talk.


I have been quite touched by the change in the poor old
man. When he sat down beside me, he said in a very gentle
way, "I want to say something to you, miss."

I could see he was not at ease, so I took his poor old
wrinkled hand in mine and asked him to speak fully.

So he said, leaving his hand in mine, "I'm afraid, my
deary, that I must have shocked you by all the wicked things
I've been sayin' about the dead, and such like, for weeks
past, but I didn't mean them, and I want ye to remember that
when I'm gone. We aud folks that be daffled, and with one
foot abaft the krok-hooal, don't altogether like to think of
it, and we don't want to feel scart of it, and that's why
I've took to makin' light of it, so that I'd cheer up my
own heart a bit. But, Lord love ye, miss, I ain't afraid of
dyin', not a bit, only I don't want to die if I can help it.
My time must be nigh at hand now, for I be aud, and a hundred
years is too much for any man to expect. And I'm so nigh it
that the Aud Man is already whettin' his scythe. Ye see, I
can't get out o' the habit of caffin' about it all at once.
The chafts will wag as they be used to. Some day soon the
Angel of Death will sound his trumpet for me. But don't ye
dooal an' greet, my deary!"--for he saw that I was crying--
"if he should come this very night I'd not refuse to answer
his call. For life be, after all, only a waitin' for some-
thin' else than what we're doin', and death be all that we
can rightly depend on. But I'm content, for it's comin' to
me, my deary, and comin' quick. It may be comin' while we be
lookin' and wonderin'. Maybe it's in that wind out over the
sea that's bringin' with it loss and wreck, and sore dis-
tress, and sad hearts. Look! Look!" he cried suddenly.
"There's something in that wind and in the hoast beyont that
sounds, and looks, and tastes, and smells like death. It's
in the air. I feel it comin'. Lord, make me answer cheerful,
when my call comes!" He held up his arms devoutly, and rai-
sed his hat. His mouth moved as though he were praying.
After a few minutes' silence, he got up, shook hands with me,
and blessed me, and said good-bye, and hobbled off. It all
touched me, and upset me very much.

I was glad when the coastguard came along, with his
spyglass under his arm. He stopped to talk with me, as he
always does, but all the time kept looking at a strange ship.

"I can't make her out," he said. "She's a Russian, by
the look of her. But she's knocking about in the queerest
way. She doesn't know her mind a bit. She seems to see the
storm coming, but can't decide whether to run up north in the
open, or to put in here. Look there again! She is steered
mighty strangely, for she doesn't mind the hand on the wheel,
changes about with every puff of wind. We'll hear more of
her before this time tomorrow."




CHAPTER 7


CUTTING FROM "THE DAILYGRAPH," 8 AUGUST


(PASTED IN MINA MURRAY'S JOURNAL)


From a correspondent.


Whitby.


One of the greatest and suddenest storms on record has
just been experienced here, with results both strange and
unique. The weather had been somewhat sultry, but not to
any degree uncommon in the month of August. Saturday even-
ing was as fine as was ever known, and the great body of
holiday-makers laid out yesterday for visits to Mulgrave
Woods, Robin Hood's Bay, Rig Mill, Runswick, Staithes, and
the various trips in the neighborhood of Whitby. The
steamers Emma and Scarborough made trips up and down the
coast, and there was an unusual amount of `tripping' both
to and from Whitby. The day was unusually fine till the
afternoon, when some of the gossips who frequent the East
Cliff churchyard, and from the commanding eminence watch
the wide sweep of sea visible to the north and east, called
attention to a sudden show of `mares tails' high in the sky
to the northwest. The wind was then blowing from the south-
west in the mild degree which in barometrical language is
ranked `No. 2, light breeze.'

The coastguard on duty at once made report, and one old
fisherman, who for more than half a century has kept watch on
weather signs from the East Cliff, foretold in an emphatic
manner the coming of a sudden storm. The approach of sunset
was so very beautiful, so grand in its masses of splendidly
coloured clouds, that there was quite an assemblage on the
walk along the cliff in the old churchyard to enjoy the
beauty.  Before the sun dipped below the black mass of Kettle-
ness, standing boldly athwart the western sky, its downward
was was marked by myriad clouds of every sunset colour,
flame, purple, pink, green, violet, and all the tints of
gold, with here and there masses not large, but of seemingly
absolute blackness, in all sorts of shapes, as well outlined
as colossal silhouettes. The experience was not lost on the
painters, and doubtless some of the sketches of the `Prelude
to the Great Storm' will grace the R. A and R. I. walls in
May next.

More than one captain made up his mind then and there
that his `cobble' or his `mule', as they term the different
classes of boats, would remain in the harbour till the storm
had passed. The wind fell away entirely during the evening,
and at midnight there was a dead calm, a sultry heat, and
that prevailing intensity which, on the approach of thunder,
affects persons of a sensitive nature.

There were but few lights in sight at sea, for even
the coasting steamers, which usually hug the shore so closely,
kept well to seaward,and but few fishing boats were in sight.
The only sail noticeable was a foreign schooner with all
sails set, which was seemingly going westwards. The foolhard-
iness or ignorance of her officers was a prolific theme for
comment whilst she remained in sight, and efforts were made
to signal her to reduce sail in the face of her danger. Be-
fore the night shut down she was seen with sails idly flapp-
ing as she gently rolled on the undulating swell of the sea.

"As idle as a painted ship upon a painted ocean."


Shortly before ten o'clock the stillness of the air
grew quite oppressive,and the silence was so marked that the
bleating of a sheep inland or the barking of a dog in the
town was distinctly heard, and the band on the pier, with
its lively French air, was like a dischord in the great har-
mony of nature's silence. A little after midnight came a
strange sound from over the sea, and high overhead the air
began to carry a strange, faint, hollow booming.

Then without warning the tempest broke. With a rapidity
which, at the time, seemed incredible,and even afterwards is
impossible to realize, the whole aspect of nature at once
became convulsed. The waves rose in growing fury, each over-
topping its fellow, till in a very few minutes the lately
glassy sea was like a roaring and devouring monster. White-
crested waves beat madly on the level sands and rushed up
the shelving cliffs. Others broke over the piers, and with
their spume swept the lanthorns of the lighthouses which
rise from the end of either pier of Whitby Harbour.

The wind roared like thunder, and blew with such force
that it was with difficulty that even strong men kept their
feet, or clung with grim clasp to the iron stanchions. It
was found necessary to clear the entire pier from the mass
of onlookers, or else the fatalities of the night would have
increased manifold. To add to the difficulties and dangers
of the time, masses of sea-fog came drifting inland. White,
wet clouds, which swept by in ghostly fashion, so dank and
damp and cold that it needed but little effort of imagina-
tion to think that the spirits of those lost at sea were
touching their living brethren with the clammy hands of
death, and many a one shuddered at the wreaths of sea-mist
swept by.

At times the mist cleared, and the sea for some dis-
tance could be seen in the glare of the lightning, which
came thick and fast, followed by such peals of thunder that
the whole sky overhead seemed trembling under the shock of
the footsteps of the storm.

Some of the scenes thus revealed were of immeasurable
grandeur and of absorbing interest. The sea, running mount-
ains high, threw skywards with each wave mighty masses of
white foam, which the tempest seemed to snatch at and whirl
away into space. Here and there a fishing boat, with a rag
of sail, running madly for shelter before the blast, now and
again the white wings of a storm-tossed seabird. On the
summit of the East Cliff the new searchlight was ready for
experiment, but had not yet been tried. The officers in
charge of it got it into working order, and in the pauses of
onrushing mist swept with it the surface of the sea. Once or
twice its service was most effective, as when a fishing boat,
with gunwale under water, rushed into the harbour, able, by
the guidance of the sheltering light, to avoid the danger of
dashing against the piers. As each boat achieved the safety
of the port there was a shout of joy from the mass of people
on the shore,a shout which for a moment seemed to cleave the
gale and was then swept away in its rush.

Before long the searchlight discovered some distance
away a schooner with all sails set, apparently the same ves-
sel which had been noticed earlier in the evening. The wind
had by this time backed to the east, and there was a shudder
amongst the watchers on the cliff as they realized the terr-
ible danger in which she now was.

Between her and the port lay the great flat reef on
which so many good ships have from time to time suffered,
and, with the wind blowing from its present quarter, it would
be quite impossible that she should fetch the entrance of
the harbour.

It was now nearly the hour of high tide, but the waves
were so great that in their troughs the shallows of the
shore were almost visible, and the schooner, with all sails
set, was rushing with such speed that, in the words of one
old salt, "she must fetch up somewhere, if it was only in
hell". Then came another rush of sea-fog, greater than any
hitherto, a mass of dank mist, which seemed to close on all
things like a gray pall, and left available to men only the
organ of hearing, for the roar of the tempest, and the crash
of the thunder, and the booming of the mighty billows came
through the damp oblivion even louder than before. The rays
of the searchlight were kept fixed on the harbour mouth
across the East Pier, where the shock was expected, and men
waited breathless.

The wind suddenly shifted to the northeast, and the
remnant of the sea fog melted in the blast. And then,
mirabile dictu, between the piers, leaping from wave to wave
as it rushed at headlong speed, swept the strange schooner
before the blast, with all sail set, and gained the safety
of the harbour. The searchlight followed her, and a shudder
ran through all who saw her, for lashed to the helm was a
corpse, with drooping head, which swung horribly to and fro
at each motion of the ship. No other form could be seen on
the deck at all.

A great awe came on all as they realised that the ship,
as if by a miracle, had found the harbour, unsteered save by
the hand of a dead man! However, all took place more quickly
than it takes to write these words. The schooner paused not,
but rushing across the harbour, pitched herself on that
accumulation of sand and gravel washed by many tides and
many storms into the southeast corner of the pier jutting
under the East Cliff, known locally as Tate Hill Pier.

There was of course a considerable concussion as the
vessel drove up on the sand heap. Every spar, rope, and stay
was strained,and some of the `top-hammer' came crashing down.
But, strangest of all, the very instant the shore was touched,
an immense dog sprang up on deck from below,as if shot up by
the concussion, and running forward, jumped from the bow on
the sand.

Making straight for the steep cliff, where the church-
yard hangs over the laneway to the East Pier so steeply that
some of the flat tombstones, thruffsteans or through-stones,
as they call them in Whitby vernacular, actually project
over where the sustaining cliff has fallen away, it disa-
ppeared in the darkness, which seemed intensified just
beyond the focus of the searchlight.

It so happened that there was no one at the moment on
Tate Hill Pier, as all those whose houses are in close prox-
imity were either in bed or were out on the heights above.
Thus the coastguard on duty on the eastern side of the har-
bour, who at once ran down to the little pier, was the first
to climb aboard. The men working the searchlight, after
scouring the entrance of the harbour without seeing anything,
then turned the light on the derelict and kept it there. The
coastguard ran aft, and when he came beside the wheel, bent
over to examine it,and recoiled at once as though under some
sudden emotion. This seemed to pique general curiosity, and
quite a number of people began to run.

It is a good way round from the West Cliff by the Draw-
bridge to Tate Hill Pier, but your correspondent is a fairly
good runner, and came well ahead of the crowd. When I arri-
ved, however, I found already assembled on the pier a crowd,
whom the coastguard and police refused to allow to come on
board. By the courtesy of the chief boatman, I was, as your
correspondent, permitted to climb on deck, and was one of a
small group who saw the dead seaman whilst actually lashed
to the wheel.

It was no wonder that the coastguard was surprised, or
even awed, for not often can such a sight have been seen.
The man was simply fastened by his hands, tied one over the
other, to a spoke of the wheel. Between the inner hand and
the wood was a crucifix, the set of beads on which it was
fastened being around both wrists and wheel, and all kept
fast by the binding cords. The poor fellow may have been
seated at one time, but the flapping and buffeting of the
sails had worked through the rudder of the wheel and had
dragged him to and fro, so that the cords with which he
was tied had cut the flesh to the bone.

Accurate note was made of the state of things, and a
doctor, Surgeon J. M. Caffyn, of 33, East Elliot Place, who
came immediately after me, declared, after making examina-
tion, that the man must have been dead for quite two days.

In his pocket was a bottle, carefully corked, empty
save for a little roll of paper, which proved to be the
addendum to the log.

The coastguard said the man must have tied up his own
hands, fastening the knots with his teeth. The fact that a
coastguard was the first on board may save some complica-
tions later on, in the Admiralty Court, for coastguards
cannot claim the salvage which is the right of the first
civilian entering on a derelict. Already, however, the legal
tongues are wagging, and one young law student is loudly
asserting that the rights of the owner are already complete-
ly sacrificed, his property being held in contravention of
the statues of mortmain, since the tiller, as emblemship, if
not proof, of delegated possession, is held in a dead hand.

It is needless to say that the dead steersman has been
reverently removed from the place where he held his honour-
able watch and ward till death, a steadfastness as noble as
that of the young Casabianca, and placed in the mortuary to
await inquest.

Already the sudden storm is passing,and its fierceness
is abating. Crowds are scattering backward, and the sky is
beginning to redden over the Yorkshire wolds.

I shall send, in time for your next issue, further de-
tails of the derelict ship which found her way so miracu-
lously into harbour in the storm.


9 August.--The sequel to the strange arrival of the
derelict in the storm last night is almost more startling
than the thing itself. It turns out that the schooner is
Russian from Varna, and is called the Demeter. She is almost
entirely in ballast of silver sand, with only a small amount
of cargo, a number of great wooden boxes filled with mould.

This cargo was consigned to a Whitby solicitor, Mr. S.F.
Billington, of 7, The Crescent, who this morning went aboard
and took formal possession of the goods consigned to him.

The Russian consul, too, acting for the charter-party,
took formal possession of the ship, and paid all harbour
dues, etc.

Nothing is talked about here today except the strange
coincidence. The officials of the Board of Trade have been
most exacting in seeing that every compliance has been made
with existing regulations. As the matter is to be a `nine
days wonder', they are evidently determined that there shall
be no cause of other complaint.

A good deal of interest was abroad concerning the dog
which landed when the ship struck, and more than a few of
the members of the S.P.C.A., which is very strong in Whitby,
have tried to befriend the animal. To the general disa-
ppointment, however, it was not to be found. It seems to
have disappeared entirely from the town. It may be that it
was frightened and made its way on to the moors, where it is
still hiding in terror.

There are some who look with dread on such a possibil-
ity, lest later on it should in itself become a danger, for
it is evidently a fierce brute. Early this morning a large
dog, a half-bred mastiff belonging to a coal merchant close
to Tate Hill Pier, was found dead in the roadway opposite
its master's yard. It had been fighting, and manifestly had
had a savage opponent, for its throat was torn away, and its
belly was slit open as if with a savage claw.


Later.--By the kindness of the Board of Trade inspector,
I have been permitted to look over the log book of the Deme-
ter, which was in order up to within three days, but con-
tained nothing of special interest except as to facts of
missing men. The greatest interest, however, is with regard
to the paper found in the bottle, which was today produced at
the inquest. And a more strange narrative than the two bet-
ween them unfold it has not been my lot to come across.

As there is no motive for concealment, I am permitted to
use them, and accordingly send you a transcript, simply
omitting technical details of seamanship and supercargo. It
almost seems as though the captain had been seized with some
kind of mania before he had got well into blue water, and
that this had developed persistently throughout the voyage.
Of course my statement must be taken cum grano, since I am
writing from the dictation of a clerk of the Russian consul,
who kindly translated for me, time being short.

LOG OF THE "DEMETER"
Varna to Whitby


Written 18 July, things so strange happening, that I
shall keep accurate note henceforth till we land.


On 6 July we finished taking in cargo, silver sand and
boxes of earth. At noon set sail. East wind, fresh. Crew,
five hands. . .two mates, cook, and myself, (captain).


On 11 July at dawn entered Bosphorus. Boarded by
Turkish Customs officers. Backsheesh. All correct. Under
way at 4 p. m.


On 12 July through Dardanelles. More Customs officers
and flagboat of guarding squadron. Backsheesh again. Work
of officers thorough, but quick. Want us off soon. At dark
passed into Archipelago.


On 13 July passed Cape Matapan. Crew dissatisfied about
something. Seemed scared, but would not speak out.


On 14 July was somewhat anxious about crew. Men all
steady fellows, who sailed with me before. Mate could not
make out what was wrong. They only told him there was SOME-
THING, and crossed themselves. Mate lost temper with one of
them that day and struck him. Expected fierce quarrel, but
all was quiet.


On 16 July mate reported in the morning that one of the
crew, Petrofsky, was missing. Could not account for it. Took
larboard watch eight bells last night, was relieved by Amra-
moff, but did not go to bunk. Men more downcast than ever.
All said they expected something of the kind, but would not
say more than there was SOMETHING aboard. Mate getting very
impatient with them. Feared some trouble ahead.


On 17 July, yesterday, one of the men, Olgaren, came to
my cabin, and in an awestruck way confided to me that he
thought there was a strange man aboard the ship. He said that
in his watch he had been sheltering behind the deckhouse, as
there was a rain storm, when he saw a tall, thin man, who was
not like any of the crew, come up the companionway, and go
along the deck forward and disappear. He followed cautiously,
but when he got to bows found no one, and the hatchways were
all closed. He was in a panic of superstitious fear, and I
am afraid the panic may spread. To allay it, I shall today
search the entire ship carefully from stem to stern.


Later in the day I got together the whole crew, and told
them, as they evidently thought there was some one in the
ship, we would search from stem to stern. First mate angry,
said it was folly, and to yield to such foolish ideas would
demoralise the men, said he would engage to keep them out of
trouble with the handspike. I let him take the helm, while
the rest began a thorough search, all keeping abreast, with
lanterns. We left no corner unsearched. As there were only
the big wooden boxes, there were no odd corners where a man
could hide. Men much relieved when search over, and went
back to work cheerfully. First mate scowled, but said nothing.


22 July.--Rough weather last three days, and all hands
busy with sails, no time to be frightened. Men seem to have
forgotten their dread. Mate cheerful again, and all on good
terms. Praised men for work in bad weather. Passed Gibral-
tar and out through Straits. All well.


24 July.--There seems some doom over this ship. Already
a hand short, and entering the Bay of Biscay with wild wea-
ther ahead, and yet last night another man lost, disappeared.
Like the first, he came off his watch and was not seen again.
Men all in a panic of fear, sent a round robin, asking to
have double watch, as they fear to be alone. Mate angry.
Fear there will be some trouble, as either he or the men will
do some violence.


28 July.--Four days in hell, knocking about in a sort of
malestrom, and the wind a tempest. No sleep for any one. Men
all worn out. Hardly know how to set a watch, since no one
fit to go on. Second mate volunteered to steer and watch,
and let men snatch a few hours sleep. Wind abating, seas
still terrific, but feel them less, as ship is steadier.


29 July.--Another tragedy. Had single watch tonight, as
crew too tired to double. When morning watch came on deck
could find no one except steersman. Raised outcry, and all
came on deck. Thorough search, but no one found. Are now
without second mate, and crew in a panic. Mate and I agreed
to go armed henceforth and wait for any sign of cause.


30 July.--Last night. Rejoiced we are nearing England.
Weather fine, all sails set. Retired worn out, slept sound-
ly, awakened by mate telling me that both man of watch and
steersman missing. Only self and mate and two hands left to
work ship.


1 August.--Two days of fog, and not a sail sighted. Had
hoped when in the English Channel to be able to signal for
help or get in somewhere. Not having power to work sails,
have to run before wind. Dare not lower, as could not raise
them again. We seem to be drifting to some terrible doom.
Mate now more demoralised than either of men. His stronger
nature seems to have worked inwardly against himself. Men
are beyond fear, working stolidly and patiently, with minds
made up to worst. They are Russian, he Roumanian.


2 August, midnight.--Woke up from few minutes sleep by
hearing a cry, seemingly outside my port. Could see nothing
in fog. Rushed on deck, and ran against mate. Tells me he
heard cry and ran, but no sign of man on watch. One more
gone. Lord, help us! Mate says we must be past Straits of
Dover, as in a moment of fog lifting he saw North Foreland,
just as he heard the man cry out. If so we are now off in
the North Sea, and only God can guide us in the fog, which
seems to move with us, and God seems to have deserted us.


3 August.--At midnight I went to relieve the man at the
wheel and when I got to it found no one there. The wind was
steady, and as we ran before it there was no yawing. I dared
not leave it, so shouted for the mate. After a few seconds,
he rushed up on deck in his flannels. He looked wild-eyed
and haggard, and I greatly fear his reason has given way. He
came close to me and whispered hoarsely, with his mouth to
my ear, as though fearing the very air might hear. "It is
here. I know it now. On the watch last night I saw It,
like a man, tall and thin, and ghastly pale. It was in the
bows, and looking out. I crept behind It, and gave it my
knife, but the knife went through It, empty as the air." And
as he spoke he took the knife and drove it savagely into
space. Then he went on, "But It is here, and I'll find It.
It is in the hold, perhaps in one of those boxes. I'll un-
screw them one by one and see. You work the helm." And with
a warning look and his finger on his lip, he went below.
There was springing up a choppy wind, and I could not leave
the helm. I saw him come out on deck again with a tool chest
and lantern, and go down the forward hatchway. He is mad,
stark, raving mad, and it's no use my trying to stop him. He
can't hurt those big boxes, they are invoiced as clay, and
to pull them about is as harmless a thing as he can do. So
here I stay and mind the helm, and write these notes. I can
only trust in God and wait till the fog clears. Then, if I
can't steer to any harbour with the wind that is, I shall
cut down sails, and lie by, and signal for help. . .

It is nearly all over now. Just as I was beginning to
hope that the mate would come out calmer, for I heard him
knocking away at something in the hold, and work is good for
him, there came up the hatchway a sudden, startled scream,
which made my blood run cold, and up on the deck he came as
if shot from a gun, a raging madman, with his eyes rolling
and his face convulsed with fear. "Save me! Save me!" he
cried, and then looked round on the blanket of fog. His
horror turned to despair, and in a steady voice he said, "You
had better come too, captain, before it is too late. He is
there! I know the secret now. The sea will save me from
Him, and it is all that is left!" Before I could say a word,
or move forward to seize him, he sprang on the bulwark and
deliberately threw himself into the sea. I suppose I know
the secret too, now. It was this madman who had got rid of
the men one by one, and now he has followed them himself.
God help me! How am I to account for all these horrors when
I get to port? When I get to port! Will that ever be?


4 August.--Still fog, which the sunrise cannot pierce, I
know there is sunrise because I am a sailor, why else I know
not. I dared not go below, I dared not leave the helm, so
here all night I stayed, and in the dimness of the night I
saw it, Him! God, forgive me, but the mate was right to
jump overboard. It was better to die like a man. To die
like a sailor in blue water, no man can object. But I am
captain, and I must not leave my ship. But I shall baffle
this fiend or monster, for I shall tie my hands to the wheel
when my strength begins to fail, and along with them I shall
tie that which He, It, dare not touch. And then, come good
wind or foul, I shall save my soul, and my honour as a
captain. I am growing weaker, and the night is coming on. If
He can look me in the face again, I may not have time to
act. . . If we are wrecked, mayhap this bottle may be found,
and those who find it may understand. If not. . .well,
then all men shall know that I have been true to my trust.
God and the Blessed Virgin and the Saints help a poor ignor-
ant soul trying to do his duty. . .


Of course the verdict was an open one. There is no
evidence to adduce, and whether or not the man himself comm-
itted the murders there is now none to say. The folk here
hold almost universally that the captain is simply a hero,
and he is to be given a public funeral. Already it is arran-
ged that his body is to be taken with a train of boats up
the Esk for a piece and then brought back to Tate Hill Pier
and up the abbey steps, for he is to be buried in the church-
yard on the cliff. The owners of more than a hundred boats
have already given in their names as wishing to follow him
to the grave.

No trace has ever been found of the great dog, at which
there is much mourning, for, with public opinion in its pre-
sent state, he would, I believe, be adopted by the town. To-
morrow will see the funeral, and so will end this one more
`mystery of the sea'.



MINA MURRAY'S JOURNAL


8 August.--Lucy was very restless all night, and I too,
could not sleep. The storm was fearful, and as it boomed
loudly among the chimney pots, it made me shudder. When a
sharp puff came it seemed to be like a distant gun. Strange-
ly enough, Lucy did not wake, but she got up twice and dress-
ed herself. Fortunately, each time I awoke in time and
managed to undress her without waking her, and got her back
to bed. It is a very strange thing, this sleep-walking, for
as soon as her will is thwarted in any physical way, her in-
tention, if there be any, disappears, and she yields herself
almost exactly to the routine of her life.

Early in the morning we both got up and went down to
the harbour to see if anything had happened in the night.
There were very few people about, and though the sun was
bright, and the air clear and fresh, the big, grim-looking
waves, that seemed dark themselves because the foam that
topped them was like snow, forced themselves in through the
mouth of the harbour, like a bullying man going through a
crowd. Somehow I felt glad that Jonathan was not on the sea
last night, but on land. But, oh, is he on land or sea?
Where is he, and how? I am getting fearfully anxious about
him. If I only knew what to do, and could do anything!


10 August.--The funeral of the poor sea captain today
was most touching. Every boat in the harbour seemed to be
there, and the coffin was carried by captains all the way
from Tate Hill Pier up to the churchyard. Lucy came with
me, and we went early to our old seat, whilst the cortege
of boats went up the river to the Viaduct and came down
again. We had a lovely view, and saw the procession nearly
all the way. The poor fellow was laid to rest near our seat
so that we stood on it, when the time came and saw everything.

Poor Lucy seemed much upset. She was restless and
uneasy all the time, and I cannot but think that her dreaming
at night is telling on her. She is quite odd in one thing.
She will not admit to me that there is any cause for rest-
lessness, or if there be, she does not understand it herself.

There is an additional cause in that poor Mr. Swales
was found dead this morning on our seat, his neck being
broken. He had evidently, as the doctor said, fallen back
in the seat in some sort of fright, for there was a look of
fear and horror on his face that the men said made them
shudder. Poor dear old man!

Lucy is so sweet and sensitive that she feels influ-
ences more acutely than other people do. Just now she was
quite upset by a little thing which I did not much heed,
though I am myself very fond of animals.

One of the men who came up here often to look for the
boats was followed by his dog. The dog is always with him.
They are both quiet persons, and I never saw the man angry,
nor heard the dog bark. During the service the dog would not
come to its master, who was on the seat with us, but kept a
few yards off, barking and howling. Its master spoke to it
gently, and then harshly, and then angrily. But it would
neither come nor cease to make a noise. It was in a fury,
with its eyes savage, and all its hair bristling out like a
cat's tail when puss is on the war path.

Finally the man too got angry, and jumped down and
kicked the dog, and then took it by the scruff of the neck
and half dragged and half threw it on the tombstone on which
the seat is fixed. The moment it touched the stone the poor
thing began to tremble. It did not try to get away, but
crouched down, quivering and cowering, and was in such a
pitiable state of terror that I tried, though without effect,
to comfort it.

Lucy was full of pity, too, but she did not attempt to
touch the dog, but looked at it in an agonised sort of way.
I greatly fear that she is of too super sensitive a nature
to go through the world without trouble. She will be dream-
ing of this tonight, I am sure. The whole agglomeration of
things, the ship steered into port by a dead man, his atti-
tude, tied to the wheel with a crucifix and beads, the
touching funeral, the dog, now furious and now in terror,
will all afford material for her dreams.

I think it will be best for her to go to bed tired out
physically, so I shall take her for a long walk by the
cliffs to Robin Hood's Bay and back. She ought not to have
much inclination for sleep-walking then.





CHAPTER 8


MINA MURRAY'S JOURNAL


Same day, 11 o'clock P.M.--Oh, but I am tired! If it
were not that I had made my diary a duty I should not open
it tonight. We had a lovely walk. Lucy, after a while, was
in gay spirits, owing, I think, to some dear cows who came
nosing towards us in a field close to the lighthouse, and
frightened the wits out of us. I believe we forgot every-
thing, except of course, personal fear, and it seemed to wipe
the slate clean and give us a fresh start. We had a capital
`severe tea' at Robin Hood's Bay in a sweet little old-
fashioned inn, with a bow window right over the seaweed-
covered rocks of the strand. I believe we should have shock-
ed the `New Woman' with our appetites. Men are more tolerant,
bless them! Then we walked home with some, or rather many,
stoppages to rest, and with our hearts full of a constant
dread of wild bulls.

Lucy was really tired, and we intended to creep off to
bed as soon as we could. The young curate came in, however,
and Mrs. Westenra asked him to stay for supper. Lucy and I
had both a fight for it with the dusty miller. I know it was
a hard fight on my part, and I am quite heroic. I think that
some day the bishops must get together and see about breed-
ing up a new class of curates, who don't take supper, no
matter how hard they may be pressed to, and who will know
when girls are tired.

Lucy is asleep and breathing softly. She has more color
in her cheeks than usual, and looks, oh so sweet. If Mr.
Holmwood fell in love with her seeing her only in the draw-
ing room, I wonder what he would say if he saw her now. Some
of the `New Women' writers will some day start an idea that
men and women should be allowed to see each other asleep be-
fore proposing or accepting. But I suppose the `New Woman'
won't condescend in future to accept. She will do the pro-
posing herself. And a nice job she will make of it too!
There's some consolation in that. I am so happy tonight,
because dear Lucy seems better. I really believe she has
turned the corner, and that we are over her troubles with
dreaming. I should be quite happy if I only knew if Jona-
than. . .God bless and keep him.


11 August.--Diary again. No sleep now, so I may as well
write. I am too agitated to sleep. We have had such an ad-
venture, such an agonizing experience. I fell asleep as soon
as I had closed my diary. . . Suddenly I became broad awake,
and sat up, with a horrible sense of fear upon me, and of
some feeling of emptiness around me. The room was dark, so I
could not see Lucy's bed. I stole across and felt for her.
The bed was empty. I lit a match and found that she was not
in the room. The door was shut, but not locked, as I had
left it. I feared to wake her mother, who has been more than
usually ill lately, so threw on some clothes and got ready to
look for her. As I was leaving the room it struck me that
the clothes she wore might give me some clue to her dreaming
intention. Dressing-gown would mean house, dress outside.
Dressing-gown and dress were both in their places. "Thank
God," I said to myself, "she cannot be far, as she is only
in her nightdress."

I ran downstairs and looked in the sitting room. Not
there! Then I looked in all the other rooms of the house,
with an ever-growing fear chilling my heart. Finally, I
came to the hall door and found it open. It was not wide
open, but the catch of the lock had not caught. The people
of the house are careful to lock the door every night, so I
feared that Lucy must have gone out as she was. There was no
time to think of what might happen. A vague over-mastering
fear obscured all details.

I took a big, heavy shawl and ran out. The clock was
striking one as I was in the Crescent, and there was not a
soul in sight. I ran along the North Terrace, but could see
no sign of the white figure which I expected. At the edge of
the West Cliff above the pier I looked across the harbour to
the East Cliff, in the hope or fear, I don't know which, of
seeing Lucy in our favorite seat.

There was a bright full moon, with heavy black, driving
clouds, which threw the whole scene into a fleeting diorama
of light and shade as they sailed across. For a moment or
two I could see nothing, as the shadow of a cloud obscured
St. Mary's Church and all around it. Then as the cloud
passed I could see the ruins of the abbey coming into view,
and as the edge of a narrow band of light as sharp as a
sword-cut moved along, the church and churchyard became
gradually visible. Whatever my expectation was, it was not
disappointed, for there, on our favorite seat, the silver
light of the moon struck a half-reclining figure, snowy white.
The coming of the cloud was too quick for me to see much, for
shadow shut down on light almost immediately, but it seemed
to me as though something dark stood behind the seat where
the white figure shone, and bent over it. What it was, whe-
ther man or beast, I could not tell.

I did not wait to catch another glance, but flew down
the steep steps to the pier and along by the fish-market to
the bridge, which was the only way to reach the East Cliff.
The town seemed as dead, for not a soul did I see. I re-
joiced that it was so, for I wanted no witness of poor Lucy's
condition. The time and distance seemed endless, and my
knees trembled and my breath came laboured as I toiled up
the endless steps to the abbey. I must have gone fast, and
yet it seemed to me as if my feet were weighted with lead,
and as though every joint in my body were rusty.

When I got almost to the top I could see the seat and
the white figure, for I was now close enough to distinguish
it even through the spells of shadow. There was undoubtedly
something, long and black, bending over the half-reclining
white figure. I called in fright, "Lucy! Lucy!" and some-
thing raised a head, and from where I was I could see a
white face and red, gleaming eyes.

Lucy did not answer, and I ran on to the entrance of the
churchyard. As I entered, the church was between me and the
seat, and for a minute or so I lost sight of her. When I
came in view again the cloud had passed, and the moonlight
struck so brilliantly that I could see Lucy half reclining
with her head lying over the back of the seat. She was
quite alone, and there was not a sign of any living thing
about.

When I bent over her I could see that she was still
asleep. Her lips were parted, and she was breathing, not
softly as usual with her, but in long, heavy gasps, as though
striving to get her lungs full at every breath. As I came
close, she put up her hand in her sleep and pulled the collar
of her nightdress close around her, as though she felt the
cold. I flung the warm shawl over her, and drew the edges
tight around her neck, for I dreaded lest she should get
some deadly chill from the night air, unclad as she was. I
feared to wake her all at once, so, in order to have my hands
free to help her, I fastened the shawl at her throat with a
big safety pin. But I must have been clumsy in my anxiety
and pinched or pricked her with it, for by-and-by, when her
breathing became quieter, she put her hand to her throat
again and moaned. When I had her carefully wrapped up I put
my shoes on her feet, and then began very gently to wake her.

At first she did not respond, but gradually she became
more and more uneasy in her sleep, moaning and sighing occa-
sionally. At last, as time was passing fast, and for many
other reasons, I wished to get her home at once, I shook her
forcibly, till finally she opened her eyes and awoke. She
did not seem surprised to see me, as, of course, she did not
realize all at once where she was.

Lucy always wakes prettily, and even at such a time, when
her body must have been chilled with cold, and her mind some-
what appalled at waking unclad in a churchyard at night, she
did not lose her grace. She trembled a little, and clung to
me. When I told her to come at once with me home, she rose
without a word, with the obedience of a child. As we passed
along, the gravel hurt my feet, and Lucy noticed me wince.
She stopped and wanted to insist upon my taking my shoes, but
I would not. However, when we got to the pathway outside the
chruchyard, where there was a puddle of water, remaining from
the storm, I daubed my feet with mud, using each foot in turn
on the other, so that as we went home, no one, in case we
should meet any one, should notice my bare feet.

Fortune favoured us, and we got home without meeting a
soul. Once we saw a man, who seemed not quite sober, pass-
ing along a street in front of us. But we hid in a door till
he had disappeared up an opening such as there are here,
steep little closes, or `wynds', as they call them in Scot-
land. My heart beat so loud all the time sometimes I
thought I should faint. I was filled with anxiety about Lucy,
not only for her health, lest she should suffer from the ex-
posure, but for her reputation in case the story should get
wind. When we got in, and had washed our feet, and had said
a prayer of thankfulness together, I tucked her into bed.
Before falling asleep she asked, even implored, me not to
say a word to any one, even her mother, about her sleep-
walking adventure.

I hesitated at first, to promise, but on thinking of the
state of her mother's health, and how the knowledge of such
a thing would fret her, and think too, of how such a story
might become distorted, nay, infallibly would, in case it
should leak out, I thought it wiser to do so. I hope I did
right. I have locked the door, and the key is tied to my
wrist, so perhaps I shall not be again disturbed. Lucy is
sleeping soundly. The reflex of the dawn is high and far
over the sea. . .


Same day, noon.--All goes well. Lucy slept till I woke
her and seemed not to have even changed her side. The ad-
venture of the night does not seem to have harmed her, on
the contrary, it has benefited her, for she looks better
this morning than she has done for weeks. I was sorry to
notice that my clumsiness with the safety-pin hurt her.
Indeed, it might have been serious, for the skin of her
throat was pierced. I must have pinched up a piece of loose
skin and have transfixed it, for there are two little red
points like pin-pricks, and on the band of her nightdress
was a drop of blood. When I apologised and was concerned
about it, she laughed and petted me, and said she did not
even feel it. Fortunately it cannot leave a scar, as it is
so tiny.


Same day, night.--We passed a happy day. The air was
clear, and the sun bright, and there was a cool breeze. We
took our lunch to Mulgrave Woods, Mrs. Westenra driving by
the road and Lucy and I walking by the cliff-path and join-
ing her at the gate. I felt a little sad myself, for I
could not but feel how absolutely happy it would have been
had Jonathan been with me. But there! I must only be
patient. In the evening we strolled in the Casino Terrace,
and heard some good music by Spohr and Mackenzie, and went
to bed early. Lucy seems more restful than she has been for
some time, and fell asleep at once. I shall lock the door
and secure the key the same as before, though I do not expect
any trouble tonight.


12 August.--My expectations were wrong, for twice dur-
ing the night I was wakened by Lucy trying to get out. She
seemed, even in her sleep, to be a little impatient at find-
ing the door shut, and went back to bed under a sort of
protest. I woke with the dawn, and heard the birds chirp-
ing outside of the window. Lucy woke, too, and I was glad
to see, was even better than on the previous morning. All
her old gaiety of manner seemed to have come back, and she
came and snuggled in beside me and told me all about Arthur.
I told her how anxious I was about Jonathan, and then she
tried to comfort me. Well, she succeeded somewhat, for,
though sympathy can't alter facts, it can make them more
bearable.


13 August.--Another quiet day, and to bed with the key
on my wrist as before. Again I awoke in the night, and
found Lucy sitting up in bed, still asleep, pointing to the
window. I got up quietly, and pulling aside the blind,
looked out. It was brilliant moonlight, and the soft effect
of the light over the sea and sky, merged together in one
great silent mystery, was beautiful beyond words. Between me
and the moonlight flitted a great bat, coming and going in
great whirling circles. Once or twice it came quite close,
but was, I suppose, frightened at seeing me, and flitted away
across the harbour towards the abbey. When I came back from
the window Lucy had lain down again, and was sleeping peace-
fully. She did not stir again all night.


14 August.--On the East Cliff, reading and writing all
day. Lucy seems to have become as much in love with the spot
as I am, and it is hard to get her away from it when it is
time to come home for lunch or tea or dinner. This after-
noon she made a funny remark. We were coming home for dinner,
and had come to the top of the steps up from the West Pier
and stopped to look at the view, as we generally do. The
setting sun, low down in the sky, was just dropping behind
Kettleness. The red light was thrown over on the East Cliff
and the old abbey, and seemed to bathe everything in a
beautiful rosy glow. We were silent for a while, and
suddenly Lucy murmured as if to herself. . .

"His red eyes again! They are just the same." It was
such an odd expression, coming apropos of nothing, that it
quite startled me. I slewed round a little, so as to see
Lucy well without seeming to stare at her, and saw that she
was in a half dreamy state, with an odd look on her face
that I could not quite make out, so I said nothing, but
followed her eyes. She appeared to be looking over at our
own seat, whereon was a dark figure seated alone. I was
quite a little startled myself, for it seemed for an instant
as if the stranger had great eyes like burning flames, but
a second look dispelled the illusion. The red sunlight was
shining on the windows of St. Mary's Church behind our seat,
and as the sun dipped there was just sufficient change in
the refraction and reflection to make it appear as if the
light moved. I called Lucy's attention to the peculiar
effect, and she became herself with a start, but she looked
sad all the same. It may have been that she was thinking
of that terrible night up there. We never refer to it, so
I said nothing, and we went home to dinner. Lucy had a head-
ache and went early to bed. I saw her asleep, and went out
for a little stroll myself.

I walked along the cliffs to the westward, and was full
of sweet sadness, for I was thinking of Jonathan. When coming
home, it was then bright moonlight, so bright that, though
the front of our part of the Crescent was in shadow, every-
thing could be well seen, I threw a glance up at our window,
and saw Lucy's head leaning out. I opened my handkerchief
and waved it. She did not notice or make any movement what-
ever. Just then, the moonlight crept round an angle of the
building, and the light fell on the window. There distinctly
was Lucy with her head lying up against the side of the win-
dow sill and her eyes shut. She was fast asleep, and by her,
seated on the window sill, was something that looked like a
good-sized bird. I was afraid she might get a chill, so I
ran upstairs, but as I came into the room she was moving back
to her bed, fast asleep, and breathing heavily. She was hold-
ing her hand to her throat, as though to protect if from the
cold.

I did not wake her, but tucked her up warmly. I have
taken care that the door is locked and the window securely
fastened.

She looks so sweet as she sleeps, but she is paler than
is her wont, and there is a drawn, haggard look under her
eyes which I do not like. I fear she is fretting about some-
thing. I wish I could find out what it is.


15 August.--Rose later than usual. Lucy was languid and
tired, and slept on after we had been called. We had a happy
surprise at breakfast. Arthur's father is better, and wants
the marriage to come off soon. Lucy is full of quiet joy,
and her mother is glad and sorry at once. Later on in the day
she told me the cause. She is grieved to lose Lucy as her
very own, but she is rejoiced that she is soon to have some
one to protect her. Poor dear, sweet lady! She confided to
me that she has got her death warrant. She has not told Lucy,
and made me promise secrecy. Her doctor told her that within
a few months, at most, she must die, for her heart is weak-
ening. At any time, even now, a sudden shock would be almost
sure to kill her.  Ah, we were wise to keep from her the affair
of the dreadful night of Lucy's sleep-walking.


17 August.--No diary for two whole days. I have not
had the heart to write. Some sort of shadowy pall seems to
be coming over our happiness. No news from Jonathan, and
Lucy seems to be growing weaker, whilst her mother's hours
are numbering to a close. I do not understand Lucy's fading
away as she is doing. She eats well and sleeps well, and
enjoys the fresh air, but all the time the roses in her
cheeks are fading, and she gets weaker and more languid day
by day. At night I hear her gasping as if for air.

I keep the key of our door always fastened to my wrist
at night, but she gets up and walks about the room, and sits
at the open window. Last night I found her leaning out when
I woke up, and when I tried to wake her I could not.

She was in a faint. When I managed to restore her, she
was weak as water, and cried silently between long, painful
struggles for breath. When I asked her how she came to be
at the window she shook her head and turned away.

I trust her feeling ill may not be from that unlucky
prick of the safety-pin. I looked at her throat just now as
she lay asleep, and the tiny wounds seem not to have healed.
They are still open, and, if anything, larger than before,
and the edges of them are faintly white. They are like little
white dots with red centres. Unless they heal within a day
or two, I shall insist on the doctor seeing about them.


LETTER, SAMUEL F. BILLINGTON & SON, SOLICITORS
WHITBY, TO MESSRS. CARTER, PATERSON & CO., LONDON.

17 August

"Dear Sirs, --

"Herewith please receive invoice of goods sent by Great
Northern Railway. Same are to be delivered at Carfax, near
Purfleet, immediately on receipt at goods station King's
Cross. The house is at present empty, but enclosed please
find keys, all of which are labelled.

"You will please deposit the boxes, fifty in number,
which form the consignment, in the partially ruined building
forming part of the house and marked `A' on rough diagrams
enclosed. Your agent will easily recognize the locality, as
it is the ancient chapel of the mansion. The goods leave by
the train at 9:30 tonight, and will be due at King's Cross
at 4:30 tomorrow afternoon. As our client wishes the deliv-
ery made as soon as possible, we shall be obliged by your
having teams ready at King's Cross at the time named and
forthwith conveying the goods to destination. In order to
obviate any delays possible through any routine requirements
as to payment in your departments, we enclose cheque herewith
for ten pounds, receipt of which please acknowledge. Should
the charge be less than this amount, you can return balance,
if greater, we shall at once send cheque for difference on
hearing from you. You are to leave the keys on coming away
in the main hall of the house, where the proprietor may get
them on his entering the house by means of his duplicate key.

"Pray do not take us as exceeding the bounds of busi-
ness courtesy in pressing you in all ways to use the utmost
expedition.

"We are, dear Sirs,
"Faithfully yours,
"SAMUEL F. BILLINGTON & SON"


LETTER, MESSRS. CARTER, PATERSON & CO., LONDON,
TO MESSRS. BILLINGTON & SON, WHITBY.

21 August.

"Dear Sirs,--

"We beg to acknowledge 10 pounds received and to return
cheque of 1 pound, 17s, 9d, amount of overplus, as shown in
receipted account herewith. Goods are delivered in exact
accordance with instructions, and keys left in parcel in
main hall, as directed.

"We are, dear Sirs,
"Yours respectfully,
"Pro CARTER, PATERSON & CO."


MINA MURRAY'S JOURNAL.


18 August.--I am happy today, and write sitting on the
seat in the churchyard. Lucy is ever so much better. Last
night she slept well all night, and did not disturb me once.

The roses seem coming back already to her cheeks, though
she is still sadly pale and wan-looking. If she were in any
way anemic I could understand it, but she is not. She is in
gay spirits and full of life and cheerfulness.  All the morbid
reticence seems to have passed from her, and she has just
reminded me, as if I needed any reminding, of that night, and
that it was here, on this very seat, I found her asleep.

As she told me she tapped playfully with the heel of
her boot on the stone slab and said,

"My poor little feet didn't make much noise then! I
daresay poor old Mr. Swales would have told me that it was
because I didn't want to wake up Geordie."

As she was in such a communicative humour, I asked her
if she had dreamed at all that night.

Before she answered, that sweet, puckered look came into
her forehead, which Arthur, I call him Arthur from her habit,
says he loves, and indeed, I don't wonder that he does. Then
she went on in a half-dreaming kind of way, as if trying to
recall it to herself.

"I didn't quite dream, but it all seemed to be real. I
only wanted to be here in this spot. I don't know why, for I
was afraid of something, I don't know what. I remember,
though I suppose I was asleep, passing through the streets
and over the bridge. A fish leaped as I went by, and I lean-
ed over to look at it, and I heard a lot of dogs howling. The
whole town seemed as if it must be full of dogs all howling
at once, as I went up the steps. Then I had a vague memory
of something long and dark with red eyes, just as we saw in
the sunset, and something very sweet and very bitter all
around me at once. And then I seemed sinking into deep green
water, and there was a singing in my ears, as I have heard
there is to drowning men, and then everything seemed passing
away from me. My soul seemed to go out from my body and
float about the air. I seem to remember that once the West
Lighthouse was right under me, and then there was a sort of
agonizing feeling, as if I were in an earthquake, and I came
back and found you shaking my body. I saw you do it before
I felt you."

Then she began to laugh. It seemed a little uncanny to
me, and I listened to her breathlessly. I did not quite like
it, and thought it better not to keep her mind on the subject,
so we drifted on to another subject, and Lucy was like her
old self again. When we got home the fresh breeze had braced
her up, and her pale cheeks were really more rosy. Her mother
rejoiced when she saw her, and we all spent a very happy
evening together.


19 August.--Joy, joy, joy! Although not all joy. At
last, news of Jonathan. The dear fellow has been ill, that
is why he did not write. I am not afraid to think it or to
say it, now that I know. Mr. Hawkins sent me on the letter,
and wrote himself, oh so kindly. I am to leave in the morn-
ing and go over to Jonathan, and to help to nurse him if
necessary, and to bring him home. Mr. Hawkins says it would
not be a bad thing if we were to be married out there. I
have cried over the good Sister's letter till I can feel it
wet against my bosom, where it lies. It is of Jonathan, and
must be near my heart, for he is in my heart. My journey is
all mapped out, and my luggage ready. I am only taking one
change of dress. Lucy will bring my trunk to London and keep
it till I send for it, for it may be that. . .I must write
no more. I must keep it to say to Jonathan, my husband. The
letter that he has seen and touched must comfort me till we
meet.

LETTER, SISTER AGATHA, HOSPITAL OF ST. JOSEPH AND STE. MARY
BUDA-PESTH, TO MISS WILLHELMINA MURRAY

12 August,

"Dear Madam.

"I write by desire of Mr. Jonathan Harker, who is him-
self not strong enough to write, though progressing well,
thanks to God and St. Joseph and Ste. Mary. He has been
under our care for nearly six weeks, suffering from a vio-
lent brain fever. He wishes me to convey his love, and to
say that by this post I write for him to Mr. Peter Hawkins,
Exeter, to say, with his dutiful respects, that he is sorry
for his delay, and that all of his work is completed. He will
require some few weeks' rest in our sanatorium in the hills,
but will then return. He wishes me to say that he has not
sufficient money with him, and that he would like to pay for
his staying here, so that others who need shall not be want-
ing for belp.

Believe me,

Yours, with sympathy

and all blessings.
Sister Agatha"


"P.S.--My patient being asleep, I open this to let you
know something more. He has told me all about you, and that
you are shortly to be his wife. All blessings to you both!
He has had some fearful shock, so says our doctor, and in his
delirium his ravings have been dreadful, of wolves and poison
and blood, of ghosts and demons, and I fear to say of what.
Be careful of him always that there may be nothing to excite
him of this kind for a long time to come. The traces of such
an illness as his do not lightly die away. We should have
written long ago, but we knew nothing of his friends, and
there was nothing on him, nothing that anyone could under-
stand. He came in the train from Klausenburg, and the guard
was told by the station master there that he rushed into the
station shouting for a ticket for home. Seeing from his
violent demeanor that he was English, they gave him a ticket
for the furthest station on the way thither that the train
reached.

"Be assured that he is well cared for. He has won all
hearts by his sweetness and gentleness. He is truly getting
on well, and I have no doubt will in a few weeks be all him-
self. But be careful of him for safety's sake. There are, I
pray God and St. Joseph and Ste. Mary, many, many, happy years
for you both."

DR. SEWARD'S DIARY


19 Agust.--Strange and sudden change in Renfield last
night. About eight o'clock he began to get excited and sniff
about as a dog does when setting. The attendant was struck
by his manner, and knowing my interest in him, encouraged
him to talk. He is usually respectful to the attendant and
at times servile, but tonight, the man tells me, he was
quite haughty. Would not condescend to talk with him at all.

All he would say was, "I don't want to talk to you. You
don't count now. The master is at hand."

The attendant thinks it is some sudden form of relig-
ious mania which has seized him. If so, we must look out for
squalls, for a strong man with homicidal and religious mania
at once might be dangerous. The combination is a dreadful one.

At Nine o'clock I visited him myself. His attitude to me
was the same as that to the attendant. In his sublime self-
feeling the difference between myself and the attendant
seemed to him as nothing. It looks like religious mania, and
he will soon think that he himself is God.

These infinitesimal distinctions between man and man
are too paltry for an Omnipotent Being. How these madmen give
themselves away! The real God taketh heed lest a sparrow
fall. But the God created from human vanity sees no differ-
ence between an eagle and a sparrow. Oh, if men only knew!

For half an hour or more Renfield kept getting excited
in greater and greater degree. I did not pretend to be watch-
ing him, but I kept strict observation all the same. All at
once that shifty look came into his eyes which we always see
when a madman has seized an idea, and with it the shifty
movement of the head and back which asylum attendants come
to know so well. He became quite quiet, and went and sat on
the edge of his bed resignedly, and looked into space with
lack-luster eyes.

I thought I would find out if his apathy were real or
only assumed, and tried to lead him to talk of his pets, a
theme which had never failed to excite his attention.

At first he made no reply, but at length said testily,
"Bother them all! I don't care a pin about them."

"What" I said. "You don't mean to tell me you don't
care about spiders?" (Spiders at present are his hobby and
the notebook is filling up with columns of small figures.)

To this he answered enigmatically, "The Bride maidens
rejoice the eyes that wait the coming of the bride. But
when the bride draweth nigh, then the maidens shine not to
the eyes that are filled."

He would not explain himself, but remained obstinately
seated on his bed all the time I remained with him.

I am weary tonight and low in spirits. I cannot but
think of Lucy, and how different things might have been. If
I don't sleep at once, chloral, the modern Morpheus! I must
be careful not to let it grow into a habit. No, I shall take
none tonight! I have thought of Lucy, and I shall not dis-
honour her by mixing the two. If need by, tonight shall be
sleepless.


Later.--Glad I made the resolution, gladder that I kept
to it. I had lain tossing about, and had heard the clock
strike only twice, when the night watchman came to me, sent
up from the ward, to say that Renfield had escaped. I threw
on my clothes and ran down at once. My patient is too dan-
gerous a person to be roaming about. Those ideas of his
might work out dangerously with strangers.

The attendant was waiting for me. He said he had seen
him not ten minutes before, seemingly asleep in his bed, when
he had looked through the observation trap in the door. His
attention was called by the sound of the window being wrench-
ed out. He ran back and saw his feet disappear through the
window, and had at once sent up for me. He was only in his
night gear, and cannot be far off.

The attendant thought it would be more useful to watch
where he should go than to follow him, as he might lose sight
of him whilst getting out of the building by the door. He is
a bulky man, and couldn't get through the window.

I am thin, so, with his aid, I got out, but feet fore-
most, and as we were only a few feet above ground landed
unhurt.

The attendant told me the patient had gone to the left,
and had taken a straight line, so I ran as quickly as I
could. As I got through the belt of trees I saw a white
figure scale the high wall which separates our grounds from
those of the deserted house.

I ran back at once, told the watchman to get three or
four men immediately and follow me into the grounds of Car-
fax, in case our friend might be dangerous. I got a ladder
myself, and crossing the wall, dropped down on the other side.
I could see Renfield's figure just disappearing behind the
angle of the house, so I ran after him. On the far side of
the house I found him pressed close against the old iron-
bound oak door of the chapel.

He was talking, apparently to some one, but I was afraid
to go near enough to hear what he was saying, les t I might
frighten him, and he should run off.

Chasing an errant swarm of bees is nothing to following
a naked lunatic, when the fit of escaping is upon him! After
a few minutes, however, I could see that he did not take note
of anything around him, and so ventured to draw nearer to
him, the more so as my men had now crossed the wall and were
closing him in. I heard him say. . .

"I am here to do your bidding, Master. I am your slave,
and you will reward me, for I shall be faithful. I have
worshipped you long and afar off. Now that you are near, I
await your commands, and you will not pass me by, will you,
dear Master, in your distribution of good things?"

He is a selfish old beggar anyhow. He thinks of the
loaves and fishes even when he believes his is in a real
Presence. His manias make a startling combination. When we
closed in on him he fought like a tiger. He is immensely
strong, for he was more like a wild beast than a man.

I never saw a lunatic in such a paroxysm of rage before,
and I hope I shall not again. It is a mercy that we have
found out his strength and his danger in good time. With
strength and determination like his, he might have done wild
work before he was caged.

He is safe now, at any rate. Jack Sheppard himself
couldn't get free from the strait waistcoat that keeps him
restrained, and he's chained to the wall in the padded room.

His cries are at times awful, but the silences that
follow are more deadly still, for he means murder in every
turn and movement.

Just now he spoke coherent words for the first time. "I
shall be patient, Master. It is coming, coming, coming!"

So I took the hint, and came too. I was too excited to
sleep, but this diary has quieted me, and I feel I shall get
some sleep tonight.




CHAPTER 9


LETTER, MINA HARKER TO LUCY WESTENRA


Buda-Pesth, 24 August.

"My dearest Lucy,

"I know you will be anxious to hear all that has happ-
ened since we parted at the railway station at Whitby.

"Well, my dear, I got to Hull all right, and caught
the boat to Hamburg, and then the train on here. I feel
that I can hardly recall anything of the journey, except
that I knew I was coming to Jonathan, and that as I should
have to do some nursing, I had better get all the sleep I
could. I found my dear one, oh, so thin and pale and weak-
looking. All the resolution has gone out of his dear eyes,
and that quiet dignity which I told you was in his face has
vanished. He is only a wreck of himself, and he does not
remember anything that has happened to him for a long time
past. At least, he wants me to believe so, and I shall
never ask.

"He has had some terrible shock, and I fear it might
tax his poor brain if he were to try to recall it. Sister
Agatha, who is a good creature and a born nurse, tells me
that he wanted her to tell me what they were, but she would
only cross herself, and say she would never tell. That the
ravings of the sick were the secrets of God, and that if a
nurse through her vocation should hear them, she should re-
spect her trust..

"She is a sweet, good soul, and the next day, when she
saw I was troubled, she opened up the subject my poor dear
raved about, added, `I can tell you this much, my dear.
That it was not about anything which he has done wrong him-
self, and you, as his wife to be, have no cause to be con-
cerned. He has not forgotten you or what he owes to you.
His fear was of great and terrible things, which no mortal
can treat of.'

"I do believe the dear soul thought I might be jealous
lest my poor dear should have fallen in love with any other
girl. The idea of my being jealous about Jonathan! And yet,
my dear, let me whisper, I felt a thrill of joy through me
when I knew that no other woman was a cause for trouble. I
am now sitting by his bedside, where I can see his face while
he sleeps. He is waking!

"When he woke he asked me for his coat, as he wanted to
get something from the pocket. I asked Sister Agatha, and
she brought all his things. I saw amongst them was his note-
book, and was was going to ask him to let me look at it, for
I knew that I might find some clue to his trouble, but I sup-
pose he must have seen my wish in my eyes, for he sent me
over to the window, saying he wanted to be quite alone for a
moment.

"Then he called me back, and he said to me very solemnly,
`Wilhelmina', I knew then that he was in deadly earnest, for
he has never called me by that name since he asked me to
marry him, `You know, dear, my ideas of the trust between
husband and wife. There should be no secret, no concealment.
I have had a great shock, and when I try to think of what it
is I feel my head spin round, and I do not know if it was
real of the dreaming of a madman. You know I had brain fever,
and that is to be mad. The secret is here, and I do not want
to know it. I want to take up my life here, with our marri-
age.' For, my dear, we had decided to be married as soon as
the formalities are complete. `Are you willing, Wilhelmina,
to share my ignorance? Here is the book. Take it and keep
it, read it if you will, but never let me know unless, indeed,
some solemn duty should come upon me to go back to the
bitter hours, asleep or awake, sane or mad, recorded here.'
He fell back exhausted, and I put the book under his pillow,
and kissed him. have asked Sister Agatha to beg the Super-
ior to let our wedding be this afternoon, and am waiting her
reply. . ."


"She has come and told me that the Chaplain of the En-
glish mission church has been sent for. We are to be married
in an hour, or as soon after as Jonathan awakes."


"Lucy, the time has come and gone. I feel very solemn,
but very, very happy. Jonathan woke a little after the hour,
and all was ready, and he sat up in bed, propped up with
pillows. He answered his `I will' firmly and strong. I
could hardly speak. My heart was so full that even those
words seemed to choke me.

"The dear sisters were so kind. Please, God, I shall
never, never forget them, nor the grave and sweet respon-
sibilities I have taken upon me. I must tell you of my
wedding present. When the chaplain and the sisters had left
me alone with my husband--oh, Lucy, it is the first time I
have written the words `my husband'--left me alone with my
husband, I took the book from under his pillow, and wrapped
it up in white paper, and tied it with a little bit of pale
blue ribbon which was round my neck, and sealed it over the
knot with sealing wax, and for my seal I used my wedding
ring. Then I kissed it and showed it to my husband, and told
him that I would keep it so, and then it would be an outward
and visible sign for us all our lives that we trusted each
other, that I would never open it unless it were for his own
dear sake or for the sake of some stern duty. Then he took
my hand in his, and oh, Lucy, it was the first time he took
his wifes' hand, and said that it was the dearest thing in
all the wide world, and that he would go through all the past
again to win it, if need be. The poor dear meant to have said
a part of the past, but he cannot think of time yet, and I
shall not wonder if at first he mixes up not only the month,
but the year.

"Well, my dear, could I say? I could only tell him that
I was the happiest woman in all the wide world, and that I
had nothing to give him except myself, my life, and my trust,
and that with these went my love and duty for all the days
of my life. And, my dear, when he kissed me, and drew me to
him with his poor weak hands, it was like a solemn pledge
between us.


"Lucy dear, do you know why I tell you all this? It is
not only because it is all sweet to me, but because you have
been, and are, very dear to me. It was my privilege to be
your friend and guide when you came from the schoolroom to
prepare for the world of life. I want you to see now, and
with the eyes of a very happy wife, whither duty has led me,
so that in your own married life you too may be all happy,
as I am. My dear, please Almighty God, your life may be all
it promises, a long day of sunshine, with no harsh wind, no
forgetting duty, no distrust. I must not wish you no pain,
for that can never be, but I do hope you will be always as
happy as I am now. Goodbye, my dear. I shall post this at
once, and perhaps, write you very soon again. I must stop,
for Jonathan is waking. I must attend my husband!

"Your ever-loving
"Mina Harker."

LETTER, LUCY WESTENRA TO MINA HARKER.

Whitby, 30 August.

"My dearest Mina,

"Oceans of love and millions of kisses, and may you
soon be in your own home with your husband. I wish you were
coming home soon enough to stay with us here. The strong air
would soon restore Jonathan. It has quite restored me. I
have an appetite like a cormorant, am full of life, and sleep
well. You will be glad to know that I have quite given up
walking in my sleep. I think I have not stirred out of my
bed for a week, that is when I once got into it at night.
Arthur says I am getting fat. By the way, I forgot to tell
you that Arthur is here. We have such walks and drives, and
rides, and rowing, and tennis, and fishing together, and I
love him more than ever. He tells me that he loves me more,
but I doubt that, for at first he told me that he couldn't
love me more than he did then. But this is nonsense. There
he is, calling to me. So no more just at present from your
loving,

"Lucy.


"P.S.--Mother sends her love. She seems better, poor dear.

"P.P.S.--We are to be married on 28 September."

DR. SEWARDS DIARY


20 August.--The case of Renfield grows even more in-
teresting. He has now so far quieted that there are spells
of cessation from his passion. For the first week after his
attack he was perpetually violent. Then one night, just as
the moon rose, he grew quiet, and kept murmuring to himself.
"Now I can wait. Now I can wait."

The attendant came to tell me, so I ran down at once to
have a look at him. He was still in the strait waistcoat
and in the padded room, but the suffused look had gone from
his face, and his eyes had something of their old pleading.
I might almost say, cringing, softness. I was satisfied
with his present condition, and directed him to be relieved.
The attendants hesitated, but finally carried out my wishes
without protest.

It was a strange thing that the patient had humour
enough to see their distrust, for, coming close to me, he
said in a whisper, all the while looking furtively at them,
"They think I could hurt you! Fancy me hurting you! The
fools!"

It was soothing, somehow, to the feelings to find my-
self disassociated even in the mind of this poor madman from
the others, but all the same I do not follow his thought. Am
I to take it that I have anything in common with him, so that
we are, as it were, to stand together. Or has he to gain from
me some good so stupendous that my well being is needful to
Him? I must find out later on. Tonight he will not speak.
Even the offer of a kitten or even a full-grown cat will not
tempt him.

He will only say, "I don't take any stock in cats. I
have more to think of now, and I can wait. I can wait."

After a while I left him. The attendant tells me that
he was quiet until just before dawn, and that then he began
to get uneasy, and at length violent, until at last he fell
into a paroxysm which exhausted him so that he swooned into
a sort of coma.


. . . Three nights has the same thing happened, violent
all day then quiet from moonrise to sunrise. I wish I could
get some clue to the cause. It would almost seem as if there
was some influence which came and went. Happy thought! We
shall tonight play sane wits against mad ones. He escaped
before without our help. Tonight he shall escape with it.
We shall give him a chance, and have the men ready to follow
in case they are required.


23 August.--"The expected always happens." How well
Disraeli knew life. Our bird when he found the cage open
would not fly, so all our subtle arrangements were for nought.
At any rate, we have proved one thing, that the spells of
quietness last a reasonable time. We shall in future be able
to ease his bonds for a few hours each day. I have given
orders to the night attendant merely to shut him in the pad-
ded room, when once he is quiet, until the hour before sun-
rise. The poor soul's body will enjoy the relief even if his
mind cannot appreciate it. Hark! The unexpected again! I
am called. The patient has once more escaped.


Later.--Another night adventure. Renfield artfully wait-
ed until the attendant was entering the room to inspect.
Then he dashed out past him and flew down the passage. I
sent word for the attendants to follow. Again he went into
the grounds of the deserted house, and we found him in the
same place, pressed against the old chapel door. When he saw
me he became furious, and had not the attendants seized him
in time, he would have tried to kill me. As we sere holding
him a strange thing happened. He suddenly redoubled his eff-
orts, and then as suddenly grew calm. I looked round instinc-
tively, but could see nothing. Then I caught the patient's
eye and followed it, but could trace nothing as it looked
into the moonlight sky, except a big bat, which was flapping
its silent and ghostly way to the west. Bats usually wheel
about, but this one seemed to go straight on, as if it knew
where it was bound for or had some intention of its own.

The patient grew calmer every instant, and presently
said, "You needn't tie me. I shall go quietly!" Without
trouble, we came back to the house. I feel there is some-
thing ominous in his calm, and shall not forget this night.



LUCY WESTENRA'S DIARY


Hillingham, 24 August.--I must imitate Mina, and keep
writing things down. Then we can have long talks when we do
meet. I wonder when it will be. I wish she were with me
again, for I feel so unhappy. Last night I seemed to be
dreaming again just as I was at Whitby. Perhaps it is the
change of air, or getting home again. It is all dark and
horrid to me, for I can remember nothing. But I am full of
vague fear, and I feel so weak and worn out. When Arthur
came to lunch he looked quite grieved when he saw me, and I
hadn't the spirit to try to be cheerful. I wonder if I could
sleep in mother's room tonight. I shall make an excuse to try.


25 August.--Another bad night. Mother did not seem to
take to my proposal. She seems not too well herself, and
doubtless she fears to worry me. I tried to keep awake, and
succeeded for a while, but when the clock struck twelve it
waked me from a doze, so I must have been falling asleep.
There was a sort of scratching or flapping at the window,
but I did not mind it, and as I remember no more, I suppose
I must have fallen asleep. More bad dreams. I wish I could
remember them. This morning I am horribly weak. My face is
ghastly pale, and my throat pains me. It must be something
wrong with my lungs, for I don't seem to be getting air
enough. I shall try to cheer up when Arthur comes, or else
I know he will be miserable to see me so.



LETTER, ARTHUR TO DR. SEWARD

"Albemarle Hotel, 31 August
"My dear Jack,

"I want you to do me a favour. Lucy is ill, that is she
has no special disease, but she looks awful, and is getting
worse every day. I have asked her if there is any cause, I
not dare to ask her mother, for to disturb the poor lady's
mind about her daughter in her present state of health would
be fatal. Mrs. Westenra has confided to me that her doom is
spoken, disease of the heart, though poor Lucy does not know
it yet. I am sure that there is something preying on my dear
girl's mind. I am almost distracted when I think of her. To
look at her gives me a pang. I told her I should ask you to
see her, and though she demurred at first, I know why, old
fellow, she finally consented. It will be a painful task for
you, I know, old friend, but it is for her sake, and I must
not hesitate to ask, or you to act. You are to come to lunch
at Hillingham tomorrow, two o'clock, so as not to arouse any
suspicion in Mrs. Westenra, and after lunch Lucy will take an
opportunity of being alone with you. I am filled with
anxiety, and want to consult with you alone as soon as I can
after you have seen her. Do not fail!

"Arthur."


TELEGRAM, ARTHUR HOLMWOOD TO SEWARD


1 September


"Am summoned to see my father, who is worse. Am writing.
Write me fully by tonight's post to Ring. Wire me if neces-
sary."

LETTER FROM DR. SEWARD TO ARTHUR HOLMWOOD


2 September

"My dear old fellow,

"With regard to Miss Westenra's health I hasten to let
you know at once that in my opinion there is not any funct-
al disturbance or any malady that I know of. At the same
time, I am not by any means satisfied with her appearance.
She is woefully different from what she was when I saw her
last. Of course you must bear in mind that I did not have
full opportunity of examination such as I should wish. Our
very friendship makes a little difficulty which not even
medical science or custom can bridge over. I had better tell
you exactly what happened, leaving you to draw, in a measure,
your own conclusions. I shall then say what I have done and
propose doing.

"I found Miss Westenra in seemingly gay spirits. Her
mother was present, and in a few seconds I made up my mind
that she was trying all she knew to mislead her mother and
prevent her from being anxious. I have no doubt she guesses,
if she does not know, what need of caution there is.

"We lunched alone, and as we all exerted ourselves to
be cheerful, we got, as some kind of reward for our labours,
some real cheerfulness amongst us. Then Mrs. Westenra went
to lie down, and Lucy was left with me. We went into her
boudoir, and till we got there her gaiety remained, for the
servants were coming and going.

"As soon as the door was closed, however, the mask fell
from her face, and she sank down into a chair with a great
sigh, and hid her eyes with her hand. When I saw that her
high spirits had failed, I at once took advantage of her re-
action to make a diagnosis.

"She said to me very sweetly, `I cannot tell you how I
loathe talking about myself.' I reminded her that a doctor's
confidence was sacred, but that you were grievously anxious
about her. She caught on to my meaning at once, and settled
that matter in a word. `Tell Arthur everything you choose. I
do not care for myself, but for him!' So I am quite free.

"I could easily see that she was somewhat bloodless, but
I could not see the usual anemic signs, and by the chance , I
was able to test the actual quality of her blood, for in
opening a window which was stiff a cord gave way, and she cut
her hand slightly with broken glass. It was a slight matter
in itself, but it gave me an evident chance, and I secured
a few drops of the blood and have analysed them.

"The qualitative analysis give a quite normal condition,
and shows, I should infer, in itself a vigorous state of
health. In other physical matters I was quite satisfied that
there is no need for anxiety, but as there must be a cause
somewhere, I have come to the conclusion that it must be
something mental.

"She complains of difficulty breathing satisfactorily
at times, and of heavy, lethargic sleep, with dreams that
frighten her, but regarding which she can remember nothing.
She says that as a child, she used to walk in her sleep, and
that when in Whitby the habit came back, and that once she
walked out in the night and went to East Cliff, where Miss
Murray found her. But she assures me that of late the habit
has not returned.

"I am in doubt, and so have done the best thing I know
of. I have written to my old friend and master, Professor
Van Helsing, of Amsterdam, who knows as much about obscure
diseases as any one in the world. I have asked him to come
over, and as you told me that all things were to be at your
charge, I have mentioned to him who you are and your rela-
tions to Miss Westenra. This, my dear fellow, is in obed-
ience to your wishes, for I am only too proud and happy to
do anything I can for her.

"Van Helsing would, I know, do anything for me for a
personal reason, so no matter on what ground he comes, we
must accept his wishes. He is a seemingly arbitrary man,
this is because he knows what he is talking about better
than any one else. He is a philosopher and a metaphysician,
and one of the most advanced scientists of his day, and he
has, I believe, an absolutely open mind. This, with an iron
nerve, a temper of the ice-brook, and indomitable resolution,
self-command, and toleration exalted from virtues to bless-
ings, and the kindliest and truest heart that beats, these
form his equipment for the noble work that he is doing for
mankind, work both in theory and practice, for his views are
as wide as his all-embracing sympathy. I tell you these facts
that you may know why I have such confidence in him. I have
asked him to come at once. I shall see Miss Westenra tomorrow
again. She is to meet me at the Stores, so that I may not
alarm her mother by too early a repetition of my call.

"Yours always."

John Seward




LETTER, ABRAHAM VAN HELSING, MD, DPh, D. LiT, ETC, ETC,
TO DR. SEWARD


2 September.

"My good Friend,

"When I received your letter I am already coming to you.
By good fortune I can leave just at once, without wrong to
any of those who have trusted me. Were fortune other, then
it were bad for those who have trusted, for I come to my
friend when he call me to aid those he holds dear. Tell your
friend that when that time you suck from my wound so swiftly
the poison of the gangrene from that knife that our other
friend, too nervous, let slip, you did more for him when he
wants my aids and you call for them than all his great for-
tune could do. But it is pleasure added to do for him, your
friend, it is to you that I come. Have near at hand, and
please it so arrange that we may see the young lady not too
late on tomorrow, for it is likely that I may have to return
here that night. But if need be I shall come again in three
days, and stay longer if it must. Till then goodbye, my
friend John.

"Van Helsing."

LETTER, DR. SEWARD TO HON. ARTHUR HOLMWOOD


3 September

"My dear Art,

"Van Helsing has come and gone. He came on with me to
Hillingham, and found that, by Lucy's discretion, her mother
was lunching out, so that we were alone with her.

"Van Helsing made a very careful examination of the
patient. He is to report to me, and I shall advise you, for
of course I was not present all the time. He is, I fear,
much concerned, but says he must think. When I told him of
our friendship and how you trust to me in the matter, he said,
`You must tell him all you think. Tell him him what I think,
if you can guess it, if you will. Nay, I am not jesting.
This is no jest, but life and death, perhaps more.' I asked
what he meant by that, for he was very serious. This was
when we had come back to town, and he was having a cup of tea
before starting on his return to Amsterdam. He would not give
me any further clue. You must not be angry with me, Art, be-
cause his very reticence means that all his brains are work-
ing for her good. He will speak plainly enough when the time
comes, be sure. So I told him I would simply write an account
of our visit, just as if I were doing a descriptive special
article for THE DAILY TELEGRAPH. He seemed not to notice, but
remarked that the smuts of London were not quite so bad as
they used to be when he was a student here. I am to get his
report tomorrow if he can possibly make it. In any case I
am to have a letter.

"Well, as to the visit, Lucy was more cheerful than on
the day I first saw her, and certainly looked better. She
had lost something of the ghastly look that so upset you, and
her breathing was normal. She was very sweet to the Professor
(as she always is), and tried to make him feel at ease, though
I could see the poor girl was making a hard struggle for it.

"I believe Van Helsing saw it, too, for I saw the quick
look under his bushy brows that I knew of old. Then he began
to chat of all things except ourselves and diseases and with
such an infinite geniality that I could see poor Lucy's pre-
tense of animation merge into reality. Then, without any
seeming change, he brought the conversation gently round to
his visit, and sauvely said,

"`My dear young miss, I have the so great pleasure be-
cause you are so much beloved. That is much, my dear, even
were there that which I do not see. They told me you were
down in the spirit, and that you were of a ghastly pale. To
them I say "Pouf!" ' And he snapped his fingers at me and
went on. `But you and I shall show them how wrong they are.
How can he', and he pointed at me with the same look and
gesture as that with which he pointed me out in his class,
on, or rather after, a particular occasion which he never
fails to remind me of, `know anything of a young ladies? He
has his madmen to play with, and to bring them back to happi-
ness, and to those that love them. It is much to do, and,
oh, but there are rewards in that we can bestow such happi-
ness.  But the young ladies! He has no wife nor daughter, and
the young do not tell themselves to the young, but to the
old, like me, who have known so many sorrows and the causes
of them. So, my dear, we will send him away to smoke the cig-
arette in the garden, whiles you and I have little talk all
to ourselves.' I took the hint, and strolled about, and pre-
sently the professor came to the window and called me in. He
looked grave, but said, ` I have made careful examination,
but there is no functional cause. With you I agree that there
has been much blood lost, it has been but is not. But the
conditions of her are in no way anemic. I have asked her to
send me her maid, that I may ask just one or two questions,
that so I may not chance to miss nothing. I know well what
she will say. And yet there is cause. There is always cause
for everything. I must go back home and think. You must
send me the telegram every day, and if there be cause I shall
come again. The disease, for not to be well is a disease,
interest me, and the sweet, young dear, she interest me too.
She charm me, and for her, if not for you or disease, I
come.'

"As I tell you, he would not say a word more, even when
we were alone. And so now, Art, you know all I know. I
shall keep stern watch. I trust your poor father is rallying.
It must be a terrible thing to you, my dear old fellow, to be
placed in such a position between two people who are both so
dear to you. I know your idea of duty to your father, and
you are right to stick to it. But if need be, I shall send
you word to come at once to Lucy, so do not be over-anxious
unless you hear from me."


DR. SEWARD'S DIARY


4 September.--Zoophagous patient still keeps up our
interest in him. He had only one outburst and that was yes-
terday at an unusual time. Just before the stroke of noon
he began to grow restless. The attendant knew the symptoms,
and at once summoned aid. Fortunately the men came at a run,
and were just in time, for at the stroke of noon he became so
violent that it took all their strength to hold him. In about
five minutes, however, he began to get more quiet, and finally
sank into a sort of melancholy, in which state he has remain-
ed up to now. The attendant tells me that his screams whilst
in the paroxysm were really appalling. I found my hands full
when I got in, attending to some of the other patients who
were frightened by him. Indeed, I can quite understand the
effect, for the sounds disturbed even me, though I was some
distance away. It is now after the dinner hour of the asylum,
and as yet my patient sits in a corner brooding, with a dull,
sullen, woe-begone look in his face, which seems rather to
indicate than to show something directly. I cannot quite
understand it.


Later.--Another change in my patient. At five o'clock
I looked in on him, and found him seemingly as happy and
contented as he used to be. He was catching flies and eating
them, and was keeping note of his capture by making nailmarks
on the edge of the door between the ridges of padding. When
he saw me, he came over and apologized for his bad conduct,
and asked me in a very humble, cringing way to be led back
to his own room, and to have his notebook again. I thought it
well to humour him, so he is back in his room with the window
open. He has the sugar of his tea spread out on the window
sill, and is reaping quite a harvest of flies. He is not now
eating them, but putting them into a box, as of old, and is
already examining the corners of his room to find a spider. I
tried to get him to talk about the past few days, for any
clue to his thoughts would be of immense help to me, but he
would not rise. For a moment or two he looked very sad, and
said in a sort of far away voice, as though saying it rather
to himself than to me.

"All over! All over! He has deserted me. No hope for
me now unless I do it myself!" Then suddenly turning to me
in a resolute way, he said, "Doctor, won't you be very good to
me and let me have a little more sugar? I think it would be
very good for me."

"And the flies?" I said.

"Yes! The flies like it, too, and I like the flies,
therefore I like it."And there are people who know so little
as to think that madmen do not argue. I procured him a double
supply, and left him as happy a man as, I suppose, any in the
world. I wish I could fathom his mind.


Midnight.--Another change in him. I had been to see Miss
Westenra, whom I found much better, and had just returned,
and was standing at our own gate looking at the sunset, when
once more I heard him yelling.  As his room is on this side of
the house, I could hear it better than in the morning. It
was a shock to me to turn from the wonderful smoky beauty of
a sunset over London, with its lurid lights and inky shadows
and all the marvellous tints that come on foul clouds even
as on foul water, and to realize all the grim sternness of my
own cold stone building, with its wealth of breathing misery,
and my own desolate heart to endure it all. I reached him
just as the sun was going down, and from his window saw the
red disc sink. As it sank he became less and less frenzied,
and just as it dipped he slid from the hands that held him,
an inert mass, on the floor. It is wonderful, however, what
intellectual recuperative power lunatics have, for within a
few minutes he stood up quite calmly and looked around him.
I signalled to the attendants not to hold him, for I was
anxious to see what he would do. He went straight over to
the window and brushed out the crumbs of sugar. Then he
took his fly box, and emptied it outside, and threw away the
box. Then he shut the window, and crossing over, sat down on
his bed.  All this surprised me, so I asked him, "Are you going
to keep flies any more?"

"No," said he. "I am sick of all that rubbish!" He
certainly is a wonderfully interesting study. I wish I could
get some glimpse of his mind or of the cause of his sudden
passion. Stop. There may be a clue after all, if we can find
why today his paroxysms came on at high noon and at sunset.
Can it be that there is a malign influence of the sun at
periods which affects certain natures, as at times the moon
does others? We shall see.

TELEGRAM. SEWARD, LONDON, TO VAN HELSING, AMSTERDAM


"4 September.--Patient still better today."

TELEGRAM, SEWARD, LONDON, TO VAN HELSING, AMSTERDAM


"5 September.--Patient greatly improved. Good appetite,
sleeps naturally, good spirits, color coming back."

TELEGRAM, SEWARD, LONDON, TO VAN HELSING, AMSTERDAM


"6 September.--Terrible change for the worse. Come at
once. Do not lose an hour. I hold over telegram to Holm-
wood till have seen you."





CHAPTER 10


LETTER, DR. SEWARD TO HON. ARTHUR HOLMWOOD


6 September

"My dear Art,

"My news today is not so good. Lucy this morning had
gone back a bit. There is, however, one good thing which has
arisen from it. Mrs. Westenra was naturally anxious concern-
ing Lucy, and has consulted me professionally about her. I
took advantage of the opportunity, and told her that my old
master, Van Helsing, the great specialist, was coming to stay
with me, and that I would put her in his charge conjointly
with myself. So now we can come and go without alarming her
unduly, for a shock to her would mean sudden death, and this,
in Lucy's weak condition, might be disastrous to her. We are
hedged in with difficulties, all of us, my poor fellow, but,
please God, we shall come through them all right. If any need
I shall write, so that, if you do not hear from me, take it
for granted that I am simply waiting for news, In haste,

"Yours ever,"

John Seward



DR. SEWARD'S DIARY


7 September.--The first thing Van Helsing said to me
when we met at Liverpool Street was, "Have you said anything
to our young friend, to lover of her?"

"No," I said. "I waited till I had seen you, as I said
in my telegram. I wrote him a letter simply telling him that
you were coming, as Miss Westenra was not so well, and that I
should let him know if need be."

"Right, my friend," he said. "Quite right! Better he
not know as yet. Perhaps he will never know. I pray so, but
if it be needed, then he shall know all. And, my good friend
John, let me caution you. You deal with the madmen. All men
are mad in some way or the other, and inasmuch as you deal
discreetly with your madmen, so deal with God's madmen too,
the rest of the world. You tell not your madmen what you do
nor why you do it. You tell them not what you think. So
you shall keep knowledge in its place, where it may rest,
where it may gather its kind around it and breed. You and I
shall keep as yet what we know here, and here." He touched
me on the heart and on the forehead, and then touched him-
self the same way. "I have for myself thoughts at the pre-
sent. Later I shall unfold to you."

"Why not now?" I asked. "It may do some good. We may
arrive at some decision."He looked at me and said, "My friend
John, when the corn is grown, even before it has ripened,
while the milk of its mother earth is in him, and the sun-
shine has not yet begun to paint him with his gold, the hus-
bandman he pull the ear and rub him between his rough hands,
and blow away the green chaff, and say to you, 'Look! He's
good corn, he will make a good crop when the time comes.' "

I did not see the application and told him so. For
reply he reached over and took my ear in his hand and pulled
it playfully, as he used long ago to do at lectures, and said,
"The good husbandman tell you so then because he knows, but
not till then. But you do not find the good husbandman dig
up his planted corn to see if he grow. That is for the
children who play at husbandry, and not for those who take
it as of the work of their life. See you now, friend John?
I have sown my corn, and Nature has her work to do in making
it sprout, if he sprout at all, there's some promise, and I
wait till the ear begins to swell." He broke off, for he
evidently saw that I understood. Then he went on gravely,
"You were always a careful student, and your case book was
ever more full than the rest. And I trust that good habit
have not fail. Remember, my friend, that knowledge is
stronger than memory, and we should not trust the weaker.
Even if you have not kept the good practice, let me tell you
that this case of our dear miss is one that may be, mind, I
say may be, of such interest to us and others that all the
rest may not make him kick the beam, as your people say.
Take then good note of it. Nothing is too small. I counsel
you, put down in record even your doubts and surmises. Here-
after it may be of interest to you to see how true you guess.
We learn from failure, not from success!"

When I described Lucy's symptoms, the same as before,
but infinitely more marked, he looked very grave, but said
nothing. He took with him a bag in which were many instru-
ments and drugs, "the ghastly paraphernalia of our bene-
ficial trade," as he once called, in one of his lectures,
the equipment of a professor of the healing craft.

When we were shown in, Mrs. Westenra met us. She was
alarmed, but not nearly so much as I expected to find her.
Nature in one of her beneficient moods has ordained that
even death has some antidote to its own terrors. Here, in
a case where any shock may prove fatal, matters are so order-
ed that, from some cause or other, the things not personal,
even the terrible change in her daughter to whom she is so
attached, do not seem to reach her. It is something like
the way dame Nature gathers round a foreign body an enve-
lope of some insensitive tissue which can protect from evil
that which it would otherwise harm by contact. If this be
an ordered selfishness, then we should pause before we con-
demn any one for the vice of egoism, for there may be deeper
root for its causes than we have knowledge of.

I used my knowledge of this phase of spiritual patho-
logy, and set down a rule that she should not be present
with Lucy, or think of her illness more than was absolutely
required. She assented readily, so readily that I saw again
the hand of Nature fighting for life. Van Helsing and I were
shown up to Lucy's room. If I was shocked when I saw her
yesterday, I was horrified when I saw her today.

She was ghastly, chalkily pale. The red seemed to have
gone even from her lips and gums, and the bones of her face
stood out prominently. Her breathing was painful to see or
hear. Van Helsing's face grew set as marble, and his eye-
brows converged till they almost touched over his nose. Lucy
lay motionless, and did not seem to have strength to speak,
so for a while we were all silent. Then Van Helsing beckon-
ed to me, and we went gently out of the room. The instant
we had closed the door he stepped quickly along the passage
to the next door, which was open. Then he pulled me quickly
in with him and closed the door. "My god!" he said. "This
is dreadful. There is not time to be lost. She will die
for sheer want of blood to keep the heart's action as it
should be. There must be a transfusion of blood at once. Is
it you or me?"

"I am younger and stronger, Professor. It must be me."

"Then get ready at once. I will bring up my bag. I am
prepared."

I went downstairs with him, and as we were going there
was a knock at the hall door. When we reached the hall, the
maid had just opened the door, and Arthur was stepping
quickly in. He rushed up to me, saying in an eager whisper,

"Jack, I was so anxious. I read between the lines of
your letter, and have been in an agony. The dad was better,
so I ran down here to see for myself. Is not that gentleman
Dr. Van Helsing? I am so thankful to you, sir, for coming."

When first the Professor's eye had lit upon him, he had
been angry at his interruption at such a time, but now, as
he took in his stalwart proportions and recognized the
strong young manhood which seemed to emanate from him, his
eyes gleamed. Without a pause he said to him as he held out
his hand,

"Sir, you have come in time. You are the lover of our
dear miss. She is bad, very, very bad. Nay, my child, do
not go like that."For he suddenly grew pale and sat down in
a chair almost fainting. "You are to help her. You can do
more than any that live, and your courage is your best help."

"What can I do?" asked Arthur hoarsely. "Tell me, and
I shall do it. My life is hers' and I would give the last
drop of blood in my body for her."

The Professor has a strongly humorous side, and I could
from old knowledge detect a trace of its origin in his
answer.

"My young sir, I do not ask so much as that, not the
last!"

"What shall I do?" There was fire in his eyes, and his
open nostrils quivered with intent. Van Helsing slapped him
on the shoulder.

"Come!" he said. "You are a man, and it is a man we
want. You are better than me, better than my friend John."
Arthur looked bewildered, and the Professor went on by ex-
plaining in a kindly way.

"Young miss is bad, very bad. She wants blood, and
blood she must have or die. My friend John and I have con-
sulted, and we are about to perform what we call transfusion
of blood, to transfer from full veins of one to the empty
veins which pine for him. John was to give his blood, as he
is the more young and strong than me."--Here Arthur took my
hand and wrung it hard in silence.--"But now you are here,
you are more good than us, old or young, who toil much in
the world of thought. Our nerves are not so calm and our
blood so bright than yours!"

Arthur turned to him and said, "If you only knew how
gladly I would die for her you would understand. . ." He
stopped with a sort of choke in his voice.

"Good boy!" said Van Helsing. "In the not-so-far-off
you will be happy that you have done all for her you love.
Come now and be silent. You shall kiss her once before it
is done, but then you must go, and you must leave at my
sign. Say no word to Madame. You know how it is with her.
There must be no shock, any knowledge of this would be one.
Come!"

We all went up to Lucy's room. Arthur by direction re-
mained outside. Lucy turned her head and looked at us, but
said nothing. She was not asleep, but she was simply too
weak to make the effort. Her eyes spoke to us, that was all.

Van Helsing took some things from his bag and laid
them on a little table out of sight. Then he mixed a nar-
cotic, and coming over to the bed, said cheerily, "Now,
little miss, here is your medicine. Drink it off, like a
good child. See, I lift you so that to swallow is easy.
Yes." She had made the effort with success.

It astonished me how long the drug took to act. This,
in fact, marked the extent of her weakness. The time seemed
endless until sleep began to flicker in her eyelids. At
last, however, the narcotic began to manifest its potency,
and she fell into a deep sleep. When the Professor was sat-
isfied, he called Arthur into the room, and bade him strip
off his coat. Then he added, "You may take that one little
kiss whiles I bring over the table. Friend John, help to
me!" So neither of us looked whilst he bent over her.

Van Helsing, turning to me, said, "He is so young and
strong, and of blood so pure that we need not defibrinate
it."

Then with swiftness, but with absolute method, Van Hel-
sing performed the operation. As the transfusion went on,
something like life seemed to come back to poor Lucy's
cheeks, and through Arthur's growing pallor the joy of his
face seemed absolutely to shine. After a bit I began to
grow anxious, for the loss of blood was telling on Arthur,
strong man as he was. It gave me an idea of what a terrible
strain Lucy's system must have undergone that what weakened
Arthur only partially restored her.

But the Professor's face was set, and he stood watch in
hand, and with his eyes fixed now on the patient and now on
Arthur. I could hear my own heart beat. Presently, he said
in a soft voice, "Do not stir an instant. It is enough. You
attend him. I will look to her."

When all was over, I could see how much Arthur was weak-
ened. I dressed the wound and took his arm to bring him
away, when Van Helsing spoke without turning round, the man
seems to have eyes in the back of his head, "The brave lover,
I think, deserve another kiss, which he shall have present-
ly." And as he had now finished his operation, he adjusted
the pillow to the patient's head. As he did so the narrow
black velvet band which she seems always to wear round her
throat, buckled with an old diamond buckle which her lover
had given her, was dragged a little up, and showed a red
mark on her throat.

Arthur did not notice it, but I could hear the deep
hiss of indrawn breath which is one of Van Helsing's ways
of betraying emotion. He said nothing at the moment, but
turned to me, saying, "Now take down our brave young lover,
give him of the port wine, and let him lie down a while. He
must then go home and rest, sleep much and eat much, that he
may be recruited of what he has so given to his love. He
must not stay here. Hold a moment! I may take it, sir, that
you are anxious of result. Then bring it with you, that in
all ways the operation is successful. You have saved her
life this time, and you can go home and rest easy in mind
that all that can be is. I shall tell her all when she is
well. She shall love you none the less for what you have
done. Goodbye."

When Arthur had gone I went back to the room. Lucy
was sleeping gently, but her breathing was stronger. I
could see the counterpane move as her breast heaved. By
the bedside sat Van Helsing, looking at her intently. The
velvet band again covered the red mark. I asked the Pro-
fessor in a whisper, "What do you make of that mark on her
throat?"

"What do you make of it?"

"I have not examined it yet," I answered, and then and
there proceeded to loose the band. Just over the external
jugular vein there were two punctures, not large, but not
wholesome looking. There was no sign of disease, but the
edges were white and worn looking, as if by some trituration.
It at once occurred to me that that this wound, or whatever
it was, might be the means of that manifest loss of blood.
But I abandoned the idea as soon as it formed, for such a
thing could not be. The whole bed would have been drenched
to a scarlet with the blood which the girl must have lost
to leave such a pallor as she had before the transfusion.

"Well?" said Van Helsing.

"Well," said I. "I can make nothing of it."

The Professor stood up. "I must go back to Amsterdam
tonight," he said "There are books and things there which
I want. You must remain here all night, and you must not
let your sight pass from her."

"Shall I have a nurse?" I asked.

"We are the best nurses, you and I. You keep watch all
night. See that she is well fed, and that nothing disturbs
her. You must not sleep all the night. Later on we can sleep,
you and I. I shall be back as soon as possible. And then
we may begin."

"May begin?" I said. "What on earth do you mean?"

"We shall see!" he answered, as he hurried out. He came
back a moment later and put his head inside the door and
said with a warning finger held up, "Remember, she is your
charge. If you leave her, and harm befall, you shall not
sleep easy hereafter!"


DR. SEWARD'S DIARY--CONTINUED


8 September.--I sat up all night with Lucy. The opiate
worked itself off towards dusk, and she waked naturally. She
looked a different being from what she had been before the
operation. Her spirits even were good, and she was full of a
happy vivacity, but I could see evidences of the absolute
prostration which she had undergone. When I told Mrs. West-
enra that Dr. Van Helsing had directed that I should sit up
with her, she almost pooh-poohed the idea, pointing out her
daughter's renewed strength and excellent spirits. I was
firm, however, and made preparations for my long vigil. When
her maid had prepared her for the night I came in, having in
the meantime had supper, and took a seat by the bedside.

She did not in any way make objection, but looked at me
gratefully whenever I caught her eye.  After a long spell she
seemed sinking off to sleep, but with an effort seemed to
pull herself together and shook it off. It was apparent that
she did not want to sleep, so I tackled the subject at once.

"You do not want to sleep?"

"No. I am afraid."

"Afraid to go to sleep! Why so? It is the boon we all
crave for."

"Ah, not if you were like me, if sleep was to you a pre-
sage of horror!"

"A presage of horror! What on earth do you mean?"

"I don't know. Oh, I don't know. And that is what is
so terrible. All this weakness comes to me in sleep, until
I dread the very thought."

"But, my dear girl, you may sleep tonight. I am here
watching you, and I can promise that nothing will happen."

"Ah, I can trust you!" she said.

I seized the opportunity, and said, "I promise that if
I see any evidence of bad dreams I will wake you at once."

"You will? Oh, will you really? How good you are to me.
Then I will sleep!" And almost at the word she gave a deep
sigh of relief, and sank back, asleep.

All night long I watched by her. She never stirred, but
slept on and on in a deep, tranquil, life-giving, health-
giving sleep. Her lips were slightly parted, and her breast
rose and fell with the regularity of a pendulum. There was
a smile on her face, and it was evident that no bad dreams
had come to disturb her peace of mind.

In the early morning her maid came, and I left her in
her care and took myself back home, for I was anxious about
many things. I sent a short wire to Van Helsing and to
Arthur, telling them of the excellent result of the opera-
tion. My own work, with its manifold arrears, took me all
day to clear off. It was dark when I was able to inquire
about my zoophagous patient. The report was good. He had
been quite quiet for the past day and night. A telegram
came from Van Helsing at Amsterdam whilst I was at dinner,
suggesting that I should be at Hillingham tonight, as it
might be well to be at hand, and stating that he was leav-
ing by the night mail and would join me early in the morn-
ing.


9 September.--I was pretty tired and worn out when I
got to Hillingham. For two nights I had hardly had a wink
of sleep, and my brain was beginning to feel that numbness
which marks cerebral exhaustion. Lucy was up and in cheer-
ful spirits. When she shook hands with me she looked sharp-
ly in my face and said,

"No sitting up tonight for you. You are worn out. I
am quite well again. Indeed, I am, and if there is to be any
sitting up, it is I who will sit up with you."

I would not argue the point, but went and had my supper.
Lucy came with me, and, enlivened by her charming presence,
I made an excellent meal, and had a couple of glasses of the
more than excellent port. Then Lucy took me upstairs, and
showed me a room next her own, where a cozy fire was burning.

"Now," she said. "You must stay here. I shall leave
this door open and my door too. You can lie on the sofa for
I know that nothing would induce any of you doctors to go
to bed whilst there is a patient above the horizon. If I
want anything I shall call out, and you can come to me at
once."

I could not but acquiesce, for I was dog tired, and
could not have sat up had I tried. So, on her renewing her
promise to call me if she should want anything, I lay on the
sofa, and forgot all about everything.

LUCY WESTENRA'S DIARY


9 September.--I feel so happy tonight. I have been so
miserably weak, that to be able to think and move about is
like feeling sunshine after a long spell of east wind out
of a steel sky. Somehow Arthur feels very, very close to me.
I seem to feel his presence warm about me. I suppose it is
that sickness and weakness are selfish things and turn our
inner eyes and sympathy on ourselves, whilst health and
strength give love rein, and in thought and feeling he can
wander where he wills. I know where my thoughts are. If
only Arthur knew! My dear, my dear, your ears must tingle
as you sleep, as mine do waking. Oh, the blissful rest of
last night! How I slept, with that dear, good Dr. Seward
watching me. And tonight I shall not fear to sleep, since
he is close at hand and within call. Thank everybody for
being so good to me. Thank God! Goodnight Arthur.

DR. SEWARD'S DIARY


10 September.--I was conscious of the Professor's hand
on my head, and started awake all in a second. That is one
of the things that we learn in an asylum, at any rate.

"And how is our patient?"

"Well, when I left her, or rather when she left me," I
answered.

"Come, let us see," he said. And together we went into
the room.

The blind was down, and I went over to raise it gently,
whilst Van Helsing stepped, with his soft, cat-like tread,
over to the bed.

As I raised the blind, and the morning sunlight flood-
ed the room, I heard the Professor's low hiss of inspiration,
and knowing its rarity, a deadly fear shot through my heart.
As I passed over he moved back, and his exclamation of
horror, "Gott in Himmel!" needed no enforcement from his
agonized face. He raised his hand and pointed to the bed,
and his iron face was drawn and ashen white. I felt my knees
begin to tremble.

There on the bed, seemingly in a swoon, lay poor Lucy,
more horribly white and wan-looking than ever. Even the
lips were white, and the gums seemed to have shrunken back
from the teeth, as we sometimes see in a corpse after a pro-
longed illness.

Van Helsing raised his foot to stamp in anger, but the
instinct of his life and all the long years of habit stood
to him, and he put it down again softly.

"Quick!" he said. "Bring the brandy."

I flew to the dining room, and returned with the de-
canter. He wetted the poor white lips with it, and together
we rubbed palm and wrist and heart. He felt her heart, and
after a few moments of agonizing suspense said,

"It is not too late. It beats, though but feebly. All
our work is undone. We must begin again. There is no young
Arthur here now. I have to call on you yourself this time,
friend John." As he spoke, he was dipping into his bag, and
producing the instruments of transfusion. I had taken off my
coat and rolled up my shirt sleeve. There was no possibility
of an opiate just at present, and no need of one. and so,
without a moment's delay, we began the operation.

After a time, it did not seem a short time either, for
the draining away of one's blood, no matter how willingly
it be given, is a terrible feeling, Van Helsing held up a
warning finger. "Do not stir," he said. "But I fear that
with growing strength she may wake, and that would make
danger, oh, so much danger. But I shall precaution take. I
shall give hypodermic injection of morphia." He proceeded
then, swiftly and deftly, to carry out his intent.

The effect on Lucy was not bad, for the faint seemed
to merge subtly into the narcotic sleep. It was with a
feeling of personal pride that I could see a faint tinge of
color steal back into the pallid cheeks and lips. No man
knows, till he experiences it, what it is to feel his own
lifeblood drawn away into the veins of the woman he loves.

The Professor watched me critically. "That will do,"
he said. "Already?" I remonstrated. "You took a great
deal more from Art." To which he smiled a sad sort of smile
as he replied,

"He is her lover, her fiance. You have work, much work
to do for her and for others, and the present will suffice.

When we stopped the operation, he attended to Lucy,
whilst I applied digital pressure to my own incision. I laid
down, while I waited his leisure to attend to me, for I felt
faint and a little sick.  By and by he bound up my wound, and
sent me downstairs to get a glass of wine for myself. As I
was leaving the room, he came after me, and half whispered.

"Mind, nothing must be said of this. If our young lover
should turn up unexpected, as before, no word to him. It
would at once frighten him and enjealous him, too. There
must be none. So!"

When I came back he looked at me carefully, and then
said, "You are not much the worse. Go into the room, and
lie on your sofa, and rest awhile, then have much breakfast
and come here to me."

I followed out his orders, for I knew how right and
wise they were. I had done my part, and now my next duty
was to keep up my strength. I felt very weak, and in the
weakness lost something of the amazement at what had occur-
red. I fell asleep on the sofa, however, wondering over
and over again how Lucy had made such a retrograde movement,
and how she could have been drained of so much blood with
no sign any where to show for it. I think I must have con-
tinued my wonder in my dreams, for, sleeping and waking my
thoughts always came back to the little punctures in her
throat and the ragged, exhausted appearance of their edges,
tiny though they were.

Lucy slept well into the day, and when she woke she was
fairly well and strong, though not nearly so much so as the
day before. When Van Helsing had seen her, he went out for
a walk, leaving me in charge, with strict injunctions that
I was not to leave her for a moment. I could hear his voice
in the hall, asking the way to the nearest telegraph office.

Lucy chatted with me freely, and seemed quite uncon-
scious that anything had happened. I tried to keep her
amused and interested. When her mother came up to see her,
she did not seem to notice any change whatever, but said to
me gratefully,

"We owe you so much, Dr. Seward, for all you have done,
but you really must now take care not to overwork yourself.
You are looking pale yourself. You want a wife to nurse
and look after you a bit, that you do!" As she spoke, Lucy
turned crimson, though it was only momentarily, for her poor
wasted veins could not stand for long an unwonted drain to
the head. The reaction came in excessive pallor as she
turned imploring eyes on me. I smiled and nodded, and laid
my finger on my lips. With a sigh, she sank back amid her
pillows.

Van Helsing returned in a couple of hours, and present-
ly said to me. "Now you go home, and eat much and drink
enough. Make yourself strong. I stay here tonight, and I
shall sit up with little miss myself. You and I must watch
the case, and we must have none other to know. I have grave
reasons. No, do not ask the. Think what you will. Do not
fear to think even the most not-improbable. Goodnight."

In the hall two of the maids came to me, and asked if
they or either of them might not sit up with Miss Lucy. They
implored me to let them, and when I said it was Dr. Van
Helsing's wish that either he or I should sit up, they asked
me quite piteously to intercede with the`foreign gentleman'.
I was much touched by their kindness. Perhaps it is because
I am weak at present, and perhaps because it was on Lucy's
account, that their devotion was manifested. For over and
over again have I seen similar instances of woman's kind-
ness. I got back here in time for a late dinner, went my
rounds, all well, and set this down whilst waiting for sleep.
It is coming.


11 September.--This afternoon I went over to Hilling-
ham. Found Van Helsing in excellent spirits, and Lucy much
better. Shortly after I had arrived, a big parcel from
abroad came for the Professor. He opened it with much im-
pressment, assumed, of course, and showed a great bundle of
white flowers.

"These are for you, Miss Lucy," he said.

"For me? Oh, Dr. Van Helsing!"

"Yes, my dear, but not for you to play with. These are
medicines." Here Lucy made a wry face. "Nay, but they are
not to take in a decoction or in nauseous form, so you need
not snub that so charming nose, or I shall point out to my
friend Arthur what woes he may have to endure in seeing so
much beauty that he so loves so much distort.  Aha, my pretty
miss, that bring the so nice nose all straight again. This
is medicinal, but you do not know how. I put him in your
window, I make pretty wreath, and hang him round your neck,
so you sleep well. Oh, yes! They, like the lotus flower,
make your trouble forgotten. It smell so like the waters of
Lethe, and of that fountain of youth that the Conquistadores
sought for in the Floridas, and find him all too late."

Whilst he was speaking, Lucy had been examining the
flowers and smelling them. Now she threw them down saying,
with half laughter, and half disgust,

"Oh, Professor, I believe you are only putting up a
joke on me. Why, these flowers are only common garlic."

To my surprise, Van Helsing rose up and said with all
his sternness, his iron jaw set and his bushy eyebrows
meeting,

"No trifling with me! I never jest! There is grim
purpose in what I do, and I warn you that you do not thwart
me. Take care, for the sake of others if not for your own."
Then seeing poor Lucy scared, as she might well be, he went
on more gently, "Oh, little miss, my dear, do not fear me.
I only do for your good, but there is much virtue to you
in those so common flowers. See, I place them myself in
your room. I make myself the wreath that you are to wear.
But hush! No telling to others that make so inquisitive
questions. We must obey, and silence is a part of obed-
ience, and obedience is to bring you strong and well into
loving arms that wait for you. Now sit still a while. Come
with me, friend John, and you shall help me deck the room
with my garlic, which is all the war from Haarlem, where my
friend Vanderpool raise herb in his glass houses all the
year. I had to telegraph yesterday, or they would not have
been here."

We went into the room, taking the flowers with us. The
Professor's actions were certainly odd and not to be found
in any pharmacopeia that I ever heard of. First he fasten-
ed up the windows and latched them securely. Next, taking
a handful of the flowers, he rubbed them all over the sashes,
as though to ensure that every whiff of air that might get
in would be laden with the garlic smell. Then with the wisp
he rubbed all over the jamb of the door, above, below, and
at each side, and round the fireplace in the same way. It
all seemed grotesque to me, and presently I said, "Well,
Professor, I know you always have a reason for what you do,
but this certainly puzzles me. It is well we have no scep-
tic here, or he would say that you were working some spell
to keep out an evil spirit."

"Perhaps I am!" He answered quietly as he began to
make the wreath which Lucy was to wear round her neck.

We then waited whilst Lucy made her toilet for the
night, and when she was in bed he came and himself fixed
the wreath of garlic round her neck. The last words he said
to her were,

"Take care you do not disturb it, and even if the room
feel close, do not tonight open the window or the door."

"I promise," said Lucy. "And thank you both a thousand
times for all your kindness to me! Oh, what have I done to
be blessed with such friends?"

As we left the house in my fly, which was waiting, Van
Helsing said, "Tonight I can sleep in peace, and sleep I want,
two nights of travel, much reading in the day between, and
much anxiety on the day to follow, and a night to sit up,
without to wink. Tomorrow in the morning early you call for
me, and we come together to see our pretty miss, so much
more strong for my `spell' which I have work. Ho, ho!"

He seemed so confident that I, remembering my own con-
fidence two nights before and with the baneful result, felt
awe and vague terror. It must have been my weakness that
made me hesitate to tell it to my friend, but I felt it all
the more, like unshed tears.





CHAPTER 11


LUCY WESTENRA'S DIARY


12 September.--How good they all are to me. I quite
love that dear Dr. Van Helsing. I wonder why he was so
anxious about these flowers. He positively frightened me,
he was so fierce. And yet he must have been right, for I
feel comfort from them already. Somehow, I do not dread
being alone tonight, and I can go to sleep without fear. I
shall not mind any flapping outside the window. Oh, the
terrible struggle that I have had against sleep so often of
late, the pain of sleeplessness, or the pain of the fear of
sleep, and with such unknown horrors as it has for me! How
blessed are some people, whose lives have no fears, no dreads,
to whom sleep is a blessing that comes nightly, and brings
nothing but sweet dreams. Well, here I am tonight, hoping for
sleep, and lying like Ophelia in the play, with`virgin crants
and maiden strewments.' I never liked garlic before, but to-
night it is delightful! There is peace in its smell. I feel
sleep coming already. Goodnight, everybody.

DR. SEWARD'S DIARY


13 September.--Called at the Berkeley and found Van
Helsing, as usual, up to time. The carriage ordered from
the hotel was waiting. The Professor took his bag, which he
always brings with him now.

Let all be put down exactly. Van Helsing and I arrived
at Hillingham at eight o'clock. It was a lovely morning. The
bright sunshine and all the fresh feeling of early autumn
seemed like the completion of nature's annual work. The
leaves were turning to all kinds of beautiful colors, but had
not yet begun to drop from the trees. When we entered we met
Mrs. Westenra coming out of the morning room. She is always
an early riser. She greeted us warmly and said,

"You will be glad to know that Lucy is better. The
dear child is still asleep. I looked into her room and saw
her, but did not go in, lest I should disturb her." The
Professor smiled, and looked quite jubilant. He rubbed his
hands together, and said, "Aha! I thought I had diagnosed
the case. My treatment is working."

To which she replied, "You must not take all the credit
to yourself, doctor. Lucy's state this morning is due in
part to me."

"How do you mean, ma'am?" asked the Professor.

"Well, I was anxious about the dear child in the night,
and went into her room. She was sleeping soundly, so soundly
that even my coming did not wake her. But the room was aw-
fully stuffy. There were a lot of those horrible, strong-
smelling flowers about everywhere, and she had actually a
bunch of them round her neck. I feared that the heavy odor
would be too much for the dear child in her weak state, so
I took them all away and opened a bit of the window to let
in a little fresh air. You will be pleased with her, I am
sure."

She moved off into her boudoir, where she usually break-
fasted early. As she had spoken, I watched the Professor's
face, and saw it turn ashen gray. He had been able to retain
his self-command whilst the poor lady was present, for he
knew her state and how mischievous a shock would be. He
actually smiled on her as he held open the door for her to
pass into her room. But the instant she had disappeared he
pulled me, suddenly and forcibly, into the dining room and
closed the door.

Then, for the first time in my life, I saw Van Helsing
break down. He raised his hands over his head in a sort of
mute despair, and then beat his palms together in a helpless
way. Finally he sat down on a chair, and putting his hands
before his face, began to sob, with loud, dry sobs that seem-
ed to come from the very racking of his heart.

Then he raised his arms again, as though appealing to
the whole universe. "God! God! God!" he said. "What have
we done, what has this poor thing done, that we are so sore
beset? Is there fate amongst us still, send down from the
pagan world of old, that such things must be, and in such
way? This poor mother, all unknowing, and all for the best
as she think, does such thing as lose her daughter body and
soul, and we must not tell her, we must not even warn her,
or she die, then both die. Oh, how we are beset! How are
all the powers of the devils against us!"

Suddenly he jumped to his feet. "Come," he said."come,
we must see and act. Devils or no devils, or all the devils
at once, it matters not. We must fight him all the same." He
went to the hall door for his bag, and together we went up to
Lucy's room.

Once again I drew up the blind, whilst Van Helsing went
towards the bed. This time he did not start as he looked on
the poor face with the same awful, waxen pallor as before. He
wore a look of stern sadness and infinite pity.

"As I expected," he murmured, with that hissing inspir-
ation of his which meant so much. Without a word he went and
locked the door, and then began to set out on the little
table the instruments for yet another operation of transfu-
sion of blood. I had long ago recognized the necessity, and
begun to take off my coat, but he stopped me with a warning
hand. "No!" he said. "Today you must operate. I shall pro-
vide. You are weakened already." As he spoke he took off
his coat and rolled up his shirtsleeve.

Again the operation. Again the narcotic. Again some
return of color to the ashy cheeks, and the regular breath-
ing of healthy sleep. This time I watched whilst Van Helsing
recruited himself and rested.

Presently he took an opportunity of telling Mrs. West-
enra that she must not remove anything from Lucy's room
without consulting him. That the flowers were of medicinal
value, and that the breathing of their odor was a part of
the system of cure. Then he took over the care of the case
himself, saying that he would watch this night and the next,
and would send me word when to come.

After another hour Lucy waked from her sleep, fresh
and bright and seemingly not much the worse for her ter-
rible ordeal.

What does it all mean? I am beginning to wonder if my
long habit of life amongst the insane is beginning to tell
upon my own brain.

LUCY WESTENRA'S DIARY


17 September.--Four days and nights of peace. I am
getting so strong again that I hardly know myself. It is as
if I had passed through some long nightmare, and had just
awakened to see the beautiful sunshine and feel the fresh
air of the morning around me. I have a dim half remem-
brance of long, anxious times of waiting and fearing, dark-
ness in which there was not even the pain of hope to make
present distress more poignant. And then long spells of
oblivion, and the rising back to life as a diver coming up
through a great press of water. Since, however, Dr. Van
Helsing has been with me, all this bad dreaming seems to
have passed away. The noises that used to frighten me out
of my wits, the flapping against the windows, the distant
voices which seemed so close to me, the harsh sounds that
came from I know not where and commanded me to do I know
not what, have all ceased. I go to bed now without any fear
of sleep. I do not even try to keep awake. I have grown
quite fond of the garlic, and a boxful arrives for me every
day from Haarlem. Tonight Dr. Van Helsing is going away, as
he has to be for a day in Amsterdam. But I need not be
watched. I am well enough to be left alone.

Thank God for Mother's sake, and dear Arthur's, and for
all our friends who have been so kind! I shall not even feel
the change, for last night Dr. Van Helsing slept in his chair
a lot of the time. I found him asleep twice when I awoke.
But I did not fear to go to sleep again, although the boughs
or bats or something flapped almost angrily against the
window panes.




THE PALL MALL GAZETTE 18 September.

THE ESCAPED WOLF
PERILOUS ADVENTURE OF OUR INTERVIEWER

INTERVIEW WITH THE KEEPER IN THE ZOOLOGICAL GARDENS


After many inquiries and almost as many refusals, and
perpetually using the words `PALL MALL GAZETTE ' as a sort
of talisman, I managed to find the keeper of the section of
the Zoological Gardens in which the wold department is in-
cluded. Thomas Bilder lives in one of the cottages in the
enclosure behind the elephant house, and was just sitting
down to his tea when I found him. Thomas and his wife are
hospitable folk, elderly, and without children, and if the
specimen I enjoyed of their hospitality be of the average
kind, their lives must be pretty comfortable. The keeper
would not enter on what he called business until the supper
was over, and we were all satisfied. Then when the table was
cleared, and he had lit his pipe, he said,

"Now, Sir, you can go on and arsk me what you want.
You'll excoose me refoosin' to talk of perfeshunal subjucts
afore meals. I gives the wolves and the jackals and the
hyenas in all our section their tea afore I begins to arsk
them questions."

"How do you mean, ask them questions?" I queried, wish-
ful to get him into a talkative humor.

" `Ittin' of them over the `ead with a pole is one way.
Scratchin' of their ears in another, when gents as is flush
wants a bit of a show-orf to their gals. I don't so much
mind the fust, the `ittin of the pole part afore I chucks in
their dinner, but I waits till they've `ad their sherry and
kawffee, so to speak, afore I tries on with the ear scratchin'.
Mind you," he added philosophically, "there's a deal of the
same nature in us as in them theer animiles. Here's you
a-comin' and arskin' of me questions about my business, and
I that grump-like that only for your bloomin' `arf-quid I'd
`a' seen you blowed fust `fore I'd answer. Not even when
you arsked me sarcastic like if I'd like you to arsk the
Superintendent if you might arsk me questions. Without
offence did I tell yer to go to `ell?"

"You did."

"An' when you said you'd report me for usin' obscene
language that was `ittin' me over the `ead. But the `arf-
quid made that all right. I weren't a-goin' to fight, so I
waited for the food, and did with my `owl as the wolves and
lions and tigers does. But, lor' love yer `art, now that the
old `ooman has stuck a chunk of her tea-cake in me, an'
rinsed me out with her bloomin' old teapot, and I've lit hup,
you may scratch my ears for all you're worth, and won't even
get a growl out of me. Drive along with your questions. I
know what yer a-comin' at, that `ere escaped wolf."

"Exactly. I want you to give me your view of it. Just
tell me how it happened, and when I know the facts I'll get
you to say what you consider was the cause of it, and how
you think the whole affair will end."

"All right, guv'nor. This `ere is about the `ole story.
That`ere wolf what we called Bersicker was one of three gray
ones that came from Norway to Jamrach's, which we bought off
him four years ago. He was a nice well-behaved wolf, that
never gave no trouble to talk of. I'm more surprised at `im
for wantin' to get out nor any other animile in the place.
But, there, you can't trust wolves no more nor women."

"Don't you mind him, Sir!" broke in Mrs. Tom, with a
cheery laugh. " `E's got mindin' the animiles so long that
blest if he ain't like a old wolf `isself! But there ain't
no `arm in `im."

"Well, Sir, it was about two hours after feedin' yes-
terday when I first hear my disturbance. I was makin' up a
litter in the monkey house for a young puma which is ill.
But when I heard the yelpin' and `owlin' I kem away straight.
There was Bersicker a-tearin' like a mad thing at the bars
as if he wanted to get out. There wasn't much people about
that day, and close at hand was only one man, a tall, thin
chap, with a `ook nose and a pointed beard, with a few
white hairs runnin' through it. He had a `ard, cold look
and red eyes, and I took a sort of mislike to him, for it
seemed as if it was `im as they was hirritated at. He `ad
white kid gloves on `is `ands, and he pointed out the ani-
miles to me and says, `Keeper, these wolves seem upset at
something.'

"`Maybe it's you,' says I, for I did not like the airs
as he give `isself. He didn't get angry, as I `oped he
would, but he smiled a kind of insolent smile, with a mouth
full of white, sharp teeth. `Oh no, they wouldn't like me,'
`e says.

" `Ow yes, they would,' says I, a-imitatin'of him.`They
always like a bone or two to clean their teeth on about tea
time, which you `as a bagful.'

"Well, it was a odd thing, but when the animiles see us
a-talkin' they lay down, and when I went over to Bersicker he
let me stroke his ears same as ever. That there man kem over,
and blessed but if he didn't put in his hand and stroke the
old wolf's ears too!

" `Tyke care,' says I. `Bersicker is quick.'

" `Never mind,' he says. I'm used to `em!'

" `Are you in the business yourself?" I says, tyking off
my `at, for a man what trades in wolves, anceterer, is a good
friend to keepers.

" `Nom' says he, `not exactly in the business, but I
`ave made pets of several.' and with that he lifts his `at
as perlite as a lord, and walks away. Old Bersicker kep'
a-lookin' arter `im till `e was out of sight, and then went
and lay down in a corner and wouldn't come hout the `ole
hevening. Well, larst night, so soon as the moon was hup,
the wolves here all began a-`owling. There warn't nothing
for them to `owl at. There warn't no one near, except some
one that was evidently a-callin' a dog somewheres out back
of the gardings in the Park road. Once or twice I went out
to see that all was right, and it was, and then the `owling
stopped. Just before twelve o'clock I just took a look
round afore turnin' in, an', bust me, but when I kem oppo-
site to old Bersicker's cage I see the rails broken and
twisted about and the cage empty. And that's all I know
for certing."

"Did any one else see anything?"

"One of our gard`ners was a-comin' `ome about that time
from a `armony, when he sees a big gray dog comin' out
through the garding `edges.  At least, so he says, but I don't
give much for it myself, for if he did `e never said a word
about it to his missis when `e got `ome, and it was only af-
ter the escape of the wolf was made known, and we had been up
all night a-huntin' of the Park for Bersicker, that he remem-
bered seein' anything. My own belief was that the `armony
`ad got into his `ead."

"Now, Mr. Bilder, can you account in any way for the
escape of the wolf?"

"Well, Sir," he said, with a suspicious sort of modesty,
"I think I can, but I don't know as `ow you'd be satisfied
with the theory."

"Certainly I shall. If a man like you, who knows the
animals from experience, can't hazard a good guess at any
rate, who is even to try?"

"well then, Sir, I accounts for it this way. It seems
to me that `ere wolf escaped--simply because he wanted to
get out."

From the hearty way that both Thomas and his wife laugh-
ed at the joke I could see that it had done service before,
and that the whole explanation was simply an elaborate sell.
I couldn't cope in badinage with the worthy Thomas, but I
thought I knew a surer way to his heart, so I said, "Now, Mr.
Bilder, we'll consider that first half-sovereign worked off,
and this brother of his is waiting to be claimed when you've
told me what you think will happen."

"Right y`are, Sir," he said briskly. "Ye`ll excoose me,
I know, for a-chaffin' of ye, but the old woman her winked
at me, which was as much as telling me to go on."

"Well, I never!" said the old lady.

"My opinion is this. That `ere wolf is a`idin' of,
somewheres. The gard`ner wot didn't remember said he was
a-gallopin' northward faster than a horse could go, but I
don't believe him, for, yer see, Sir, wolves don't gallop
no more nor dogs does, they not bein' built that way. Wolves
is fine things in a storybook, and I dessay when they gets
in packs and does be chivyin' somethin' that's more afeared
than they is they can make a devil of a noise and chop it
up, whatever it is. But, Lor' bless you, in real life a wolf
is only a low creature, not half so clever or bold as a good
dog, and not half a quarter so much fight in `im. This one
ain't been used to fightin' or even to providin' for hisself,
and more like he's somewhere round the Park a'hidin' an'
a'shiverin' of, and if he thinks at all, wonderin' where he
is to get his breakfast from. Or maybe he's got down some
area and is in a coal cellar. My eye, won't some cook get
a rum start when she sees his green eyes a-shinin' at her
out of the dark! If he can't get food he's bound to look
for it, and mayhap he may chance to light on a butcher's
shop in time. If he doesn't, and some nursemaid goes out
walkin' or orf with a soldier, leavin' of the hinfant in the
perambulator--well, then I shouldn't be surprised if the
census is one babby the less. That's all."

I was handing him the half-sovereign, when something
came bobbing up against the window, and Mr. Bilder's face
doubled its natural length with surprise.

"God bless me!" he said. "If there ain't old Bersicker
come back by `isself!"

He went to the door and opened it, a most unnecessary
proceeding it seemed to me. I have always thought that a
wild animal never looks so well as when some obstacle of
pronounced durability is between us. A personal experience
has intensified rather than diminished that idea.

After all, however, there is nothing like custom, for
neither Bilder nor his wife thought any more of the wolf
than I should of a dog. The animal itself was a peaceful
and well-behaved as that father of all picture-wolves, Red
Riding Hood's quondam friend, whilst moving her confidence
in masquerade.

The whole scene was a unutterable mixture of comedy and
pathos. The wicked wolf that for a half a day had paralyzed
London and set all the children in town shivering in their
shoes, was there in a sort of penitent mood, and was received
and petted like a sort of vulpine prodigal son. Old Bilder
examined him all over with most tender solicitude, and when
he had finished with his penitent said,

"There, I knew the poor old chap would get into some
kind of trouble. Didn't I say it all along? Here's his
head all cut and full of broken glass. `E's been a-gettin'
over some bloomin' wall or other. It's a shyme that people
are allowed to top their walls with broken bottles. This
`ere's what comes of it. Come along, Bersicker."

He took the wolf and locked him up in a cage, with a
piece of meat that satisfied, in quantity at any rate, the
elementary conditions of the fatted calf, and went off to
report.

I came off too, to report the only exclusive information
that is given today regarding the strange escapade at the
Zoo.



DR. SEWARD'S DIARY


17 September.--I was engaged after dinner in my study
posting up my books, which, through press of other work and
the many visits to Lucy, had fallen sadly into arrear. Sud-
denly the door was burst open, and in rushed my patient, with
his face distorted with passion. I was thunderstruck, for
such a thing as a patient getting of his own accord into the
Superintendent's study is almost unknown.

Without an instant's notice he made straight at me. He
had a dinner knife in his hand, and as I saw he was dangerous,
I tried to keep the table between us. He was too quick and
too strong for me, however, for before I could get my balance
he had struck at me and cut my left wrist rather severely.

Before he could strike again, however, I got in my right
hand and he was sprawling on his back on the floor. My wrist
bled freely, and quite a little pool trickled on to the car-
pet. I saw that my friend was not intent on further effort,
and occupied myself binding up my wrist, keeping a wary eye
on the prostrate figure all the time. When the attendants
rushed in, and we turned our attention to him, his employ-
ment positively sickened me. He was lying on his belly on
the floor licking up, like a dog, the blood which had fallen
from my wounded wrist. He was easily secured, and to my
surprise, went with the attendants quite placidly, simply
repeating over and over again, "The blood is the life! The
blood is the life!"

I cannot afford to lose blood just at present. I have
lost too much of late for my physical good, and then the pro-
longed strain of Lucy's illness and its horrible phases is
telling on me. I am over excited and weary, and I need rest,
rest, rest. Happily Van Helsing has not summoned me, so I
need not forego my sleep. Tonight I could not well do with-
out it.



TELEGRAM, VAN HELSING, ANTWERP, TO SEWARD, CARFAX

(Sent to Carfax, Sussex, as no county given, delivered late
by twenty-two hours.)

17 September.--Do not fail to be at Hilllingham tonight.
If not watching all the time, frequently visit and see that
flowers are as placed, very important, do not fail. Shall be
with you as soon as possible after arrival.



DR. SEWARD'S DIARY


18 September.--Just off train to London. The arrival of
Van Helsing's telegram filled me with dismay. A whole night
lost, and I know by bitter experience what may happen in a
night. Of course it is possible that all may be well, but
what may have happened? Surely there is some horrible doom
hanging over us that every possible accident should thwart
us in all we try to do. I shall take this cylinder with me,
and then I can complete my entry on Lucy's phonograph.




MEMORANDUM LEFT BY LUCY WESTENRA

17 September, Night.--I write this and leave it to be
seen, so that no one may by any chance get into trouble
through me. This is an exact record of what took place to-
night. I feel I am dying of weakness, and have barely
strength to write, but it must be done if I die in the doing.

I went to bed as usual, taking care that the flowers
were placed as Dr. Van Helsing directed, and soon fell
asleep.

I was waked by the flapping at the window, which had
begun after that sleep-walking on the cliff at Whitby when
Mina saved me, and which now I know so well. I was not
afraid, but I did wish that Dr. Seward was in the next room,
as Dr. Van Helsing said he would be, so that I might have
called him. I tried to sleep, but I could not. Then there
came to me the old fear of sleep, and I determined to keep
awake. Perversely sleep would try to come then when I did
not want it. So, as I feared to be alone, I opened my door
and called out. "Is there anybody there?" There was no
answer. I was afraid to wake mother, and so closed my door
again. Then outside in the shrubbery I heard a sort of howl
like a dog's, but more fierce and deeper. I went to the win-
dow and looked out, but could see nothing, except a big bat,
which had evidently been buffeting its wings against the
window. So I went back to bed again, but determined not to
go to sleep. Presently the door opened, and mother looked in.
Seeing by my moving that I was not asleep, she came in and
sat by me. She said to me even more sweetly and softly than
her wont,

"I was uneasy about you, darling, and came in to see
that you were all right."

I feared she might catch cold sitting there, and asked
her to come in and sleep with me, so she came into bed, and
lay down beside me. She did not take off her dressing gown,
for she said she would only stay a while and then go back
to her own bed. As she lay there in my arms, and I in hers
the flapping and buffeting came to the window again. She
was startled and a little frightened, and cried out, "What
is that?"

I tried to pacify her, and at last succeeded, and she
lay quiet. But I could hear her poor dear heart still beat-
ing terribly. After a while there was the howl again out in
the shrubbery, and shortly after there was a crash at the
window, and a lot of broken glass was hurled on the floor.
The window blind blew back with the wind that rushed in, and
in the aperture of the broken panes there was the head of a
great, gaunt gray wolf.

Mother cried out in a fright, and struggled up into a
sitting posture, and clutched wildly at anything that would
help her. Amongst other things, she clutched the wreath of
flowers that Dr. Van Helsing insisted on my wearing round
my neck, and tore it away from me. For a second or two she
sat up, pointing at the wolf, and there was a strange and
horrible gurgling in her throat. Then she fell over, as if
struck with lightning, and her head hit my forehead and made
me dizzy for a moment or two.

The room and all round seemed to spin round. I kept my
eyes fixed on the window, but the wolf drew his head back,
and a whole myriad of little specks seems to come blowing
in through the broken window, and wheeling and circling
round like the pillar of dust that travellers describe when
there is a simoon in the desert. I tried to stir, but there
was some spell upon me, and dear Mother's poor body, which
seemed to grow cold already, for her dear heart had ceased
to beat, weighed me down, and I remembered no more for a
while.

The time did not seem long, but very, very awful, till
I recovered consciousness again. Somewhere near, a passing
bell was tolling. The dogs all round the neighborhood were
howling, and in our shrubbery, seemingly just outside, a
nightingale was singing. I was dazed and stupid with pain
and terror and weakness, but the sound of the nightingale
seemed like the voice of my dead mother come back to comfort
me. The sounds seemed to have awakened the maids, too, for
I could hear their bare feet pattering outside my door. I
called to them, and they came in, and when they saw what had
happened, and what it was that lay over me on the bed, they
screamed out. The wind rushed in through the broken window,
and the door slammed to. They lifted off the body of my
dear mother, and laid her, covered up with a sheet, on the
bed after I had got up. They were all so frightened and
nervous that I directed them to go to the dining room and
each have a glass of wine. The door flew open for an instant
and closed again. The maids shrieked, and then went in a
body to the dining room, and I laid what flowers I had on
my dear mother's breast. When they were there I remembered
what Dr. Van Helsing had told me, but I didn't like to re-
move them, and besides, I would have some of the servants
to sit up with me now. I was surprised that the maids did
not come back. I called them, but got no answer, so I went
to the dining room to look for them.

My heart sank when I saw what had happened. They all
four lay helpless on the floor, breathing heavily. The de-
canter of sherry was on the table half full, but there was
a queer, acrid smell about. I was suspicious, and examined
the decanter. It smelt of laudanum, and looking on the
sideboard, I found that the bottle which Mother's doctor uses
for her--oh! did use--was empty. What am I to do? What am I
to do? I am back in the room with Mother. I cannot leave her,
and I am alone, save for the sleeping servants, whom some
one has drugged. Alone with the dead! I dare not go out, for
I can hear the low howl of the wolf through the broken
window.

The air seems full of specks, floating and circling in
the draught from the window, and the lights burn blue and
dim. What am I to do? God shield me from harm this night!
I shall hide this paper in my breast, where they shall find
it when they come to lay me out. My dear mother gone! It
is time that I go too. Goodbye, dear Arthur, if I should
not survive this night. God keep you, dear, and God help me!





CHAPTER 12


DR. SEWARD'S DIARY


18 September.--I drove at once to Hillingham and ar-
rived early. Keeping my cab at the gate, I went up the
avenue alone. I knocked gently and rang as quietly as pos-
sible, for I feared to disturb Lucy or her mother, and hoped
to only bring a servant to the door. After a while, finding
no response, I knocked and rang again, still no answer. I
cursed the laziness of the servants that they should lie
abed at such an hour, for it was now ten o'clock, and so rang
and knocked again, but more impatiently, but still without
response. Hitherto I had blamed only the servants, but now
a terrible fear began to assail me. Was this desolation but
another link in the chain of doom which seemed drawing tight
round us? Was it indeed a house of death to which I had come,
too late? I know that minutes, even seconds of delay, might
mean hours of danger to Lucy, if she had had again one of
those frightful relapses, and I went round the house to try
if I could find by chance an entry anywhere.

I could find no means of ingress. Every window and door
was fastened and locked, and I returned baffled to the porch.
As I did so, I heard the rapid pit-pat of a swiftly driven
horse's feet. They stopped at the gate, and a few seconds
later I met Van Helsing running up the avenue. When he saw
me, he gasped out, "Then it was you, and just arrived. How
is she? Are we too late? Did you not get my telegram?"

I answered as quickly and coherently as I could that I
had only got his telegram early in the morning, and had not
a minute in coming here, and that I could not make any one
in the house hear me. He paused and raised his hat as he
said solemnly, "Then I fear we are too late. God's will be
done!"

With his usual recuperative energy, he went on, "Come.
If there be no way open to get in, we must make one. Time
is all in all to us now."

We went round to the back of the house, where there was
a kitchen window. The Professor took a small surgical saw
from his case, and handing it to me, pointed to the iron bars
which guarded the window. I attacked them at once and had
very soon cut through three of them. Then with a long, thin
knife we pushed back the fastening of the sashes and opened
the window. I helped the Professor in, and followed him.
There was no one in the kitchen or in the servants' rooms,
which were close at hand. We tried all the rooms as we went
along, and in the dining room, dimly lit by rays of light
through the shutters, found four servant women lying on the
floor. There was no need to think them dead, for their ster-
torous breathing and the acrid smell of laudanum in the room
left no doubt as to their condition.

Van Helsing and I looked at each other, and as we moved
away he said, "We can attend to them later."Then we ascended
to Lucy's room. For an instant or two we paused at the door
to listen, but there was no sound that we could hear. With
white faces and trembling hands, we opened the door gently,
and entered the room.

How shall I describe what we saw? On the bed lay two
women, Lucy and her mother. The latter lay farthest in, and
she was covered with a white sheet, the edge of which had
been blown back by the drought through the broken window,
showing the drawn, white, face, with a look of terror fixed
upon it. By her side lay Lucy, with face white and still
more drawn. The flowers which had been round her neck we
found upon her mother's bosom, and her throat was bare, show-
ing the two little wounds which we had noticed before, but
looking horribly white and mangled. Without a word the Pro-
fessor bent over the bed, his head almost touching poor
Lucy's breast. Then he gave a quick turn of his head, as of
one who listens, and leaping to his feet, he cried out to me,
"It is not yet too late! Quick! Quick! Bring the brandy!"

I flew downstairs and returned with it, taking care to
smell and taste it, lest it, too, were drugged like the de-
canter of sherry which I found on the table. The maids were
still breathing, but more restlessly, and I fancied that the
narcotic was wearing off. I did not stay to make sure, but
returned to Van Helsing. He rubbed the brandy, as on another
occasion, on her lips and gums and on her wrists and the
palms of her hands. He said to me, "I can do this, all that
can be at the present. You go wake those maids. Flick them
in the face with a wet towel, and flick them hard. Make them
get heat and fire and a warm bath. This poor soul is nearly
as cold as that beside her. She will need be heated before
we can do anything more."

I went at once, and found little difficulty in waking
three of the women. The fourth was only a young girl, and
the drug had evidently affected her more strongly so I lift-
ed her on the sofa and let her sleep.

The others were dazed at first, but as remembrance came
back to them they cried and sobbed in a hysterical manner. I
was stern with them, however, and would not let them talk. I
told them that one life was bad enough to lose, and if they
delayed they would sacrifice Miss Lucy. So, sobbing and cry-
ing they went about their way, half clad as they were, and
prepared fire and water. Fortunately, the kitchen and boiler
fires were still alive, and there was no lack of hot water.
We got a bath and carried Lucy out as she was and placed
her in it. Whilst we were busy chafing her limbs there was a
knock at the hall door. One of the maids ran off, hurried
on some more clothes, and opened it. Then she returned and
whispered to us that there was a gentleman who had come with
a message from Mr. Holmwood. I bade her simply tell him
that he must wait, for we could see no one now. She went
away with the message, and, engrossed with our work, I clean
forgot all about him.

I never saw in all my experience the Professor work in
such deadly earnest. I knew, as he knew, that it was a
stand-up fight with death, and in a pause told him so. He
answered me in a way that I did not understand, but with the
sternest look that his face could wear.

"If that were all, I would stop here where we are now,
and let her fade away into peace, for I see no light in life
over her horizon." He went on with his work with, if poss-
ible, renewed and more frenzied vigour.

Presently we both began to be conscious that the heat
was beginning to be of some effect. Lucy's heart beat a
trifle more audibly to the stethoscope, and her lungs had a
perceptible movement. Van Helsing's face almost beamed, and
as we lifted her from the bath and rolled her in a hot sheet
to dry her he said to me, "The first gain is ours! Check to
the King!"

We took Lucy into another room, which had by now been
prepared, and laid her in bed and forced a few drops of
brandy down her throat. I noticed that Van Helsing tied a
soft silk handkerchief round her throat. She was still
unconscious, and was quite as bad as, if not worse than, we
had ever seen her.

Van Helsing called in one of the women, and told her to
stay with her and not to take her eyes off her till we re-
turned, and then beckoned me out of the room.

"We must consult as to what is to be done," he said as
we descended the stairs. In the hall he opened the dining
room door, and we passed in, he closing the door carefully
behind him. The shutters had been opened, but the blinds
were already down, with that obedience to the etiquette of
death which the British woman of the lower classes always
rigidly observes. The room was, therefore, dimly dark. It
was, however, light enough for our purposes. Van Helsing's
sternness was somewhat relieved by a look of perplexity. He
was evidently torturing his mind about something, so I waited
for an instant, and he spoke.

"What are we to do now? Where are we to turn for help?
We must have another transfusion of blood, and that soon, or
that poor girl's life won't be worth an hour's purchase. You
are exhausted already. I am exhausted too. I fear to trust
those women, even if they would have courage to submit. What
are we to do for some one who will open his veins for her?"

"What's the matter with me, anyhow?"

The voice came from the sofa across the room, and its
tones brought relief and joy to my heart, for they were those
of Quincey Morris.

Van Helsing started angrily at the first sound, but his
face softened and a glad look came into his eyes as I cried
out, "Quincey Morris!" and rushed towards him with out-
stretched hands.

"What brought you her?" I cried as our hands met.

"I guess Art is the cause."

He handed me a telegram.-- `Have not heard from Seward
for three days, and am terribly anxious. Cannot leave. Father
still in same condition. Send me word how Lucy is. Do not
delay.--Holmwood.'

"I think I came just in the nick of time. You know you
have only to tell me what to do."

Van Helsing strode forward, and took his hand, looking
him straight in the eyes as he said, "A brave man's blood is
the best thing on this earth when a woman is in trouble.
You're a man and no mistake. Well, the devil may work
against us for all he's worth, but God sends us men when we
want them."

Once again we went through that ghastly operation. I
have not the heart to go through with the details. Lucy had
got a terrible shock and it told on her more than before, for
though plenty of blood went into her veins, her body did not
respond to the treatment as well as on the other occasions.
Her struggle back into life was something frightful to see
and hear. However, the action of both heart and lungs im-
proved, and Van Helsing made a sub-cutaneous injection of
morphia, as before, and with good effect. Her faint became
a profound slumber. The Professor watched whilst I went
downstairs with Quincey Morris, and sent one of the maids
to pay off one of the cabmen who were waiting.

I left Quincey lying down after having a glass of wine,
and told the cook to get ready a good breakfast. Then a
thought struck me, and I went back to the room where Lucy
now was. When I came softly in, I found Van Helsing with a
sheet or two of note paper in his hand. He had evidently
read it, and was thinking it over as he sat with his hand to
his brow. There was a look of grim satisfaction in his face,
as of one who has had a doubt solved. He handed me the paper
saying only, "It dropped from Lucy's breast when we carried
her to the bath."

When I had read it, I stook looking at the Professor,
and after a pause asked him, "In God's name, what does it
all mean? Was she, or is she, mad, or what sort of horri-
ble danger is it?" I was so bewildered that I did not know
what to say more. Van Helsing put out his hand and took
the paper, saying,

"Do not trouble about it now. Forget if for the pre-
sent. You shall know and understand it all in good time, but
it will be later. And now what is it that you came to me to
say?" This brought me back to fact, and I was all myself
again.

"I came to speak about the certificate of death. If we do
not act properly and wisely, there may be an inquest, and
that paper would have to be produced. I am in hopes that we
need have no inquest, for if we had it would surely kill poor
Lucy, if nothing else did. I know, and you know, and the
other doctor who attended her knows, that Mrs. Westenra had
disease of the heart, and we can certify that she died of it.
Let us fill up the certificate at once, and I shall take it
myself to the registrar and go on to the undertaker."

"Good, oh my friend John! Well thought of! Truly Miss
Lucy, if she be sad in the foes that beset her, is at least
happy in the friends thatlove her. One, two, three, all open
their veins for her, besides one old man. Ah, yes, I know,
friend John. I am not blind! I love you all the more for it!
Now go."

In the hall I met Quincey Morris, with a telegram for
Arthur telling him that Mrs. Westenra was dead, that Lucy
also had been ill, but was now going on better, and that Van
Helsing and I were with her. I told him where I was going,
and he hurried me out, but as I was going said,

"When you come back, Jack, may I have two words with you
all to ourselves?" I nodded in reply and went out. I found no
difficulty about the registration, and arranged with the local
undertaker to come up in the evening to measure for the
coffin and to make arrangements.

When I got back Quincey was waiting for me. I told him
I would see him as soon as I knew about Lucy, and went up to
her room. She was still sleeping, and the Professor seemingly
had not moved from his seat at her side. From his putting his
finger to his lips, I gathered that he expected her to wake
before long and was afraid of fore-stalling nature. So I went
down to Quincey and took him into the breakfast room, where
the blinds were not drawn down, and which was a little more
cheerful, or rather less cheerless, than the other rooms.

When we were alone, he said to me, "Jack Seward, I don't
want to shove myself in anywhere where I've no right to be,
but this is no ordinary case. You know I loved that girl and
wanted to marry her, but although that's all past and gone, I
can't help feeling anxious about her all the same. What is
it that's wrong with her? The Dutchman, and a fine old fellow
is is, I can see that, said that time you two came into the
room, that you must have another transfusion of blood, and
that both you and he were exhausted. Now I know well that you
medical men speak in camera, and that a man must not expect
to know what they consult about in private. But this is no
common matter, and whatever it is, I have done my part. Is not
that so?"

"That's so," I said, and he went on.

"I take it that both you and Van Helsing had done al-
ready what I did today. Is not that so?"

"That's so."

"And I guess Art was in it too. When I saw him four
days ago down at his own place he looked queer. I have not
seen anything pulled down so quick since I was on the Pampas
and had a mare that I was fond of go to grass all in a night.
One of those big bats that they call vampires had got at her
in the night, and what with his gorge and the vein left open,
there wasn't enough blood in her to let her stand up, and I
had to put a bullet through her as she lay. Jack, if you
may tell me without betraying confidence, Arthur was the
first, is not that so?"

As he spoke the poor fellow looked terribly anxious. He
was in a torture of suspense regarding the woman he loved,
and his utter ignorance of the terrible mystery which seem-
ed to surround her intensified his pain. His very heart
was bleeding, and it took all the manhood of him, and there
was a royal lot of it, too, to keep him from breaking down.
I paused before answering, for I felt that I must not betray
anything which the Professor wished kept secret, but already
he knew so much, and guessed so much, that there could be no
reason for not answering, so I answered in the same phrase.

"That's so."

"And how long has this been going on?"

"About ten days."

"Ten days! Then I guess, Jack Seward, that that poor
pretty creature that we all love has had put into her veins
within that time the blood of four strong men. Man alive,
her whole body wouldn't hold it." Then coming close to me,
he spoke in a fierce half-whisper. "What took it out?"

I shook my head. "That," I said, "is the crux. Van
Helsing is simply frantic about it, and I am at my wits' end.
I can't even hazard a guess. There has been a series of
little circumstances which have thrown out all our calcula-
tions as to Lucy being properly watched. But these shall
not occur again. Here we stay until all be well, or ill."

Quincey held out his hand. "Count me in," he said. "You
and the Dutchman will tell me what to do, and I'll do it."

When she woke late in the afternoon, Lucy's first move-
ment was to feel in her breast, and to my surprise, produced
the paper which Van Helsing had given me to read. The care-
ful Professor had replaced it where it had come from, lest
on waking she should be alarmed. Her eyes then lit on Van
Helsing and on me too, and gladdened. Then she looked round
the room, and seeing where she was, shuddered. She gave a
loud cry, and put her poor thin hands before her pale face.

We both understood what was meant, that she had real-
ized to the full her mother's death. So we tried what we
could to comfort her. Doubtless sympathy eased her somewhat,
but she was very low in thought and spirit, and wept silently
and weakly for a long time. We told her that either or both
of us would now remain with her all the time, and that seemed
to comfort her. Towards dusk she fell into a doze. Here a
very odd thing occurred. Whilst still asleep she took the
paper from her breast and tore it in two. Van Helsing stepped
over and took the pieces from her. All the same, however,
she went on with the action of tearing, as though the mater-
ial were still in her hands. Finally she lifted her hands
and opened them as though scattering the fragments. Van
Helsing seemed surprised, and his brows gathered as if in
thought, but he said nothing.


19 September.--All last night she slept fitfully, being
always afraid to sleep, and something weaker when she woke
from it. The Professor and I took in turns to watch, and we
never left her for a moment unattended. Quincey Morris said
nothing about his intention, but I knew that all night long
he patrolled round and round the house.

When the day came, its searching light showed the rav-
ages in poor Lucy's strength. She was hardly able to turn
her head, and the little nourishment which she could take
seemed to do her no good. At times she slept, and both Van
Helsing and I noticed the difference in her, between sleep-
ing and waking. Whilst asleep she looked stronger, although
more haggard, and her breathing was softer. Her open mouth
showed the pale gums drawn back from the teeth, which looked
positively longer and sharper than usual. When she woke the
softness of her eyes evidently changed the expression, for
she looked her own self, although a dying one. In the after-
noon she asked for Arthur, and we telegraphed for him. Quinc-
ey went off to meet him at the station.

When he arrived it was nearly six o'clock, and the sun
was setting full and warm, and the red light streamed in
through the window and gave more color to the pale cheeks.
When he saw her, Arthur was simply choking with emotion, and
none of us could speak. In the hours that had passed, the fits
of sleep, or the comatose condition that passed for it, had
grown more frequent, so that the pauses when conversation was
possible were shortened. Arthur's presence, however, seemed
to act as a stimulant. She rallied a little, and spoke to him
more brightly than she had done since we arrived. He too
pulled himself together, and spoke as cheerily as he could,
so that the best was made of everything.

It is now nearly one o'clock, and he and Van Helsing
are sitting with her. I am to relieve them in a quarter
of an hour, and I am entering this on Lucy's phonograph. Until
six o'clock they are to try to rest. I fear that tomorrow
will end our watching, for the shock has been too great. The
poor child cannot rally. God help us all.




LETTER MINA HARKER TO LUCY WESTENRA

(Unopened by her)


17 September

My dearest Lucy,

"It seems an age since I heard from you, or indeed since
I wrote. You will pardon me, I know, for all my faults when
you have read all my budget of news. Well, I got my hus-
band back all right. When we arrived at Exeter there was a
carriage waiting for us, and in it, though he had an attack
of gout, Mr. Hawkins. He took us to his house, where there
were rooms for us all nice and comfortable, and we dined
together. After dinner Mr. Hawkins said,

" `My dears, I want to drink your health and prosper-
ity, and may every blessing attend you both. I know you
both from children, and have, with love and pride, seen you
grow up. Now I want you to make your home here with me. I
have left to me neither chick nor child.  All are gone, and in
my will I have left you everything.' I cried, Lucy dear, as
Jonathan and the old man clasped hands. Our evening was a
very, very happy one.

"So here we are, installed in this beautiful old house,
and from both my bedroom and the drawing room I can see the
great elms of the cathedral close, with their great black
stems standing out against the old yellow stone of the cath-
edral, and I can hear the rooks overhead cawing and cawing
and chattering and chattering and gossiping all day, after
the manner of rooks--and humans. I am busy, I need not tell
you, arranging things and housekeeping. Jonathan and Mr.
Hawkins are busy all day, for now that Jonathan is a partner,
Mr. Hawkins wants to tell him all about the clients.

"How is your dear mother getting on? I wish I could
run up to town for a day or two to see you, dear, but I, dare
not go yet, with so much on my shoulders, and Jonathan wants
looking after still. He is beginning to put some flesh on his
bones again, but he was terribly weakened by the long illness.
Even now he sometimes starts out of his sleep in a sudden
way and awakes all trembling until I can coax him back to
his usual placidity. However, thank God, these occasions grow
less frequent as the days go on, and they will in time pass
away altogether, I trust. And now I have told you my news,
let me ask yours. When are you to be married, and where, and
who is to perform the ceremony, and what are you to wear, and
is it to be a public or private wedding? Tell me all about
it, dear, tell me all about everything, for there is nothing
which interests you which will not be dear to me. Jonathan
asks me to send his `respectful duty', but I do not think
that is good enough from the junior partner of the important
firm Hawkins & Harker. And so, as you love me, and he loves
me, and I love you with all the moods and tenses of the verb,
I send you simply his `love' instead. Goodbye, my dearest
Lucy, and blessings on you."
Yours,
Mina Harker



REPORT FROM PATRICK HENNESSEY, MD, MRCSLK, QCPI, ETC, ETC,
TO JOHN SEWARD, MD

20 September

My dear Sir:

"In accordance with your wishes, I enclose report of
the conditions of everything left in my charge. With regard
to patient, Renfield, there is more to say. He has had an-
other outbreak, which might have had a dreadful ending, but
which, as it fortunately happened, was unattended with any
unhappy results. This afternoon a carrier's cart with two men
made a call at the empty house whose grounds abut on ours,
the house to which, you will remember, the patient twice ran
away. The men stopped at our gate to ask the porter their
way, as they were strangers.

"I was myself looking out of the study window, having a
smoke after dinner, and saw one of them come up to the house.
As he passed the window of Renfield's room, the patient be-
gan to rate him from within, and called him all the foul
names he could lay his tongue to. The man, who seemed a de-
cent fellow enough, contented himself by telling him to `shut
up for a foul-mouthed beggar', whereon our man accused him of
robbing him and wanting to murder him and said that he would
hinder him if he were to swing for it. I opened the window
and signed to the man not to notice, so he contented himself
after looking the place over and making up his mind as to
what kind of place he had got to by saying, `Lor' bless yer,
sir, I wouldn't mind what was said to me in a bloomin' mad-
house. I pity ye and the guv'nor for havin' to live in the
house with a wild beast like that.'

"Then he asked his way civilly enough, and I told him
where the gate of the empty house was. He went away follow-
ed by threats and curses and revilings from our man. I went
down to see if I could make out any cause for his anger,
since he is usually such a well-behaved man, and except his
violent fits nothing of the kind had ever occurred. I found
him, to my astonishment, quite composed and most genial in
his manner. I tried to get him to talk of the incident, but
he blandly asked me questions as to what I meant, and led me
to believe that he was completely oblivious of the affair.
It was, I am sorry to say, however, only another instance of
his cunning, for within half an hour I heard of him again.
This time he had broken out through the window of his room,
and was running down the avenue. I called to the attendants
to follow me, and ran after him, for I feared he was intent
on some mischief. My fear was justified when I saw the same
cart which had passed before coming down the road, having on
it some great wooden boxes. The men were wiping their fore-
heads, and were flushed in the face, as if with violent ex-
ercise. Before I could get up to him, the patient rushed at
them, and pulling one of them off the cart, began to knock
his head against the ground. If I had not seized him just
at the moment, I believe he would have killed the man there
and then. The other fellow jumped down and struck him over
the head with the butt end of his heavy whip. It was a
horrible blow, but he did not seem to mind it, but seized
him also, and struggled with the three of us, pulling us to
and fro as if we were kittens. You know I am no lightweight,
and the others were both burly men. At first he was silent
in his fighting, but as we began to master him, and the at-
tendants were putting a strait waistcoat on him, he began to
shout, `I'll frustrate them! They shan't rob me! They shan't
murder me by inches! I'll fight for my Lord and Master!'and
all sorts of similar incoherent ravings. It was with very
considerable difficulty that they got him back to the house
and put him in the padded room. One of the attendants,
Hardy, had a finger broken. However, I set it all right, and
he is going on well.

"The two carriers were at first loud in their threats
of actions for damages, and promised to rain all the pen-
alties of the law on us. Their threats were, however,
mingled with some sort of indirect apology for the defeat
of the two of them by a feeble madman. They said that if
it had not been for the way their strength had been spent
in carrying and raising the heavy boxes to the cart they
would have made short work of him. They gave as another
reason for their defeat the extraordinary state of drouth
to which they had been reduced by the dusty nature of
their occupation and the reprehensible distance from the
scene of their labors of any place of public entertainment.
I quite understood their drift, and after a stiff glass of
strong grog, or rather more of the same, and with each a
sovereign in hand, they made light of the attack, and swore
that they would encounter a worse madman any day for the
pleasure of meeting so `bloomin' good a bloke' as your
correspondent. I took their names and addresses, in case
they might be needed. They are as follows: Jack Smollet,
of Dudding's Rents, King George's Road, Great Walworth, and
Thomas Snelling, Peter Farley's Row, Guide Court, Bethnal
Green. They are both in the employment of Harris & Sons,
Moving and Shipment Company, Orange Master's Yard, Soho.

"I shall report to you any matter of interest occurr-
ing here, and shall wire you at once if there is anything of
importance.

"Believe me, dear Sir,

"Yours faithfully,

"Patrick Hennessey."



LETTER, MINA HARKER TO LUCY WESTENRA
(Unopened by her)


18 September

"My dearest Lucy,

"Such a sad blow has befallen us. Mr. Hawkins has died
very suddenly. Some may not think it so sad for us, but we
had both come to so love him that it really seems as though
we had lost a father. I never knew either father or mother,
so that the dear old man's death is a real blow to me. Jon-
athan is greatly distressed. It is not only that he feels
sorrow, deep sorrow, for the dear, good man who has befriended
him all his life, and now at the end has treated him like his
own son and left him a fortune which to people of our modest
bringing up is wealth beyond the dream of avarice, but Jona-
than feels it on another account. He says the amount of re-
sponsibility which it puts upon him makes him nervous. He
begins to doubt himself. I try to cheer him up, and my belief
in him helps him to have a belief in himself. But it is here
that the grave shock that he experienced tells upon him the
most. Oh, it is too hard that a sweet, simple, noble, strong
nature such as his, a nature which enabled him by our dear,
good friend's aid to rise from clerk to master in a few
years, should be so injured that the very essence of its
strength is gone. Forgive me, dear, if I worry you with my
troubles in the midst of your own happiness, but Lucy dear,
I must tell someone, for the strain of keeping up a brave and
cheerful appearance to Jonathan tries me, and I have no one
here that I can confide in. I dread coming up to London, as
we must do that day after tomorrow, for poor Mr. Hawkins left
in his will that he was to be buried in the grave with his
father. As there are no relations at all, Jonathan will have
to be chief mourner. I shall try to run over to see you,
dearest, if only for a few minutes. Forgive me for troubling
you. With all blessings,

"Your loving

Mina Harker"



DR. SEWARD' DIARY


20 September.--Only resolution and habit can let me
make an entry tonight. I am too miserable, too low spirited,
too sick of the world and all in it, including life itself,
that I would not care if I heard this moment the flapping of
the wings of the angel of death. And he has been flapping
those grim wings to some purpose of late, Lucy's mother and
Arthur's father, and now. . . Let me get on with my work.

I duly relieved Van Helsing in his watch over Lucy. We
wanted Arthur to go to rest also, but he refused at first.
It was only when I told him that we should want him to help
us during the day, and that we must not all break down for
want of rest, lest Lucy should suffer, that he agreed to go.

Van Helsing was very kind to him. "Come, my child," he
said. "Come with me. You are sick and weak, and have had
much sorrow and much mental pain, as well as that tax on your
strength that we know of. You must not be alone, for to be
alone is to be full of fears and alarms. Come to the drawing
room, where there is a big fire, and there are two sofas. You
shall lie on one, and I on the other, and our sympathy will
be comfort to each other, even though we do not speak, and
even if we sleep."

Arthur went off with him, casting back a longing look
on Lucy's face, which lay in her pillow, almost whiter than
the lawn. She lay quite still, and I looked around the room
to see that all was as it should be. I could see that the
Professor had carried out in this room, as in the other, his
purpose of using the garlic. The whole of the window sashes
reeked with it, and round Lucy's neck, over the silk hand-
kerchief which Van Helsing made her keep on, was a rough
chaplet of the same odorous flowers.

Lucy was breathing somewhat stertorously, and her face
was at its worst, for the open mouth showed the pale gums.
Her teeth, in the dim, uncertain light, seemed longer and
sharper than they had been in the morning. In particular,
by some trick of the light, the canine teeth looked longer
and sharper than the rest.

I sat down beside her, and presently she moved uneas-
ily. At the same moment there came a sort of dull flapping
or buffeting at the window. I went over to it softly, and
peeped out by the corner of the blind. There was a full
moonlight, and I could see that the noise was made by a great
bat, which wheeled around, doubtless attracted by the light,
although so dim, and every now and again struck the window
with its wings. When I came back to my seat, I found that
Lucy had moved slightly, and had torn away the garlic flowers
from her throat. I replaced them as well as I could, and sat
watching her.

Presently she woke, and I gave her food, as Van Helsing
had prescribed. She took but a little, and that languidly.
There did not seem to be with her now the unconscious strug-
gle for life and strength that had hitherto so marked her
illness. It struck me as curious that the moment she became
conscious she pressed the garlic flowers close to her. It
was certainly odd that whenever she got into that lethargic
state, with the stertorous breathing, she put the flowers
from her, but that when she waked she clutched them close,
There was no possibility of making amy mistake about this,
for in the long hours that followed, she had many spells
of sleeping and waking and repeated both actions many times.

At six o'clock Van Helsing came to relieve me. Arthur
had then fallen into a doze, and he mercifully let him sleep
on. When he saw Lucy's face I could hear the sissing indraw
of breath, and he said to me in a sharp whisper."Draw up the
blind. I want light!" Then he bent down, and, with his face
almost touching Lucy's, examined her carefully. He removed
the flowers and lifted the silk handkerchief from her throat.
As he did so he started back and I could hear his ejacula-
tion, "Mein Gott!" as it was smothered in his throat. I
bent over and looked, too, and as I noticed some queer chill
came over me. The wounds on the throat had absolutely dis-
appeared.

For fully five minutes Van Helsing stood looking at her,
with his face at its sternest. Then he turned to me and said
calmly, "She is dying. It will not be long now. It will be
much difference, mark me, whether she dies conscious or in
her sleep. Wake that poor boy, and let him come and see the
last. He trusts us, and we have promised him."

I went to the dining room and waked him. He was dazed
for a moment, but when he saw the sunlight streaming in
through the edges of the shutters he thought he was late, and
expressed his fear. I assured him that Lucy was still asleep,
but told him as gently as i could that both Van Helsing and
I feared that the end was near. He covered his face with his
hands, and slid down on his knees by the sofa, where he re-
mained, perhaps a minute, with his head buried, praying,
whilst his shoulders shook with grief. I took him by the
hand and raised him up. "Come," I said, "my dear old fellow,
summon all your fortitude. It will be best and easiest for
her."

When we came into Lucy's room I could see that Van Hel-
sing had, with his usual forethought, been putting matters
straight and making everything look as pleasing as possible.
He had even brushed Lucy's hair, so that it lay on the
pillow in its usual sunny ripples. When we came into the
room she opened her eyes, and seeing him, whispered softly,
"Arthur! Oh, my love, I am so glad you have come!"

He was stooping to kiss her, when Van Helsing motioned
him back. "No," he whispered, "not yet! Hold her hand, it
will comfort her more."

So Arthur took her hand and knelt beside her, and she
looked her best, with all the soft lines matching the angelic
beauty of her eyes. Then gradually her eyes closed, and she
sank to sleep. For a little bit her breast heaved softly,
and her breath came and went like a tired child's.

And then insensibly there came the strange change which
I had noticed in the night. Her breathing grew stertorous,
the mouth opened, and the pale gums, drawn back, made the
teeth look longer and sharper than ever. In a sort of sleep-
waking, vague, unconscious way she opened her eyes, which
were now dull and hard at once, and said in a soft, voluptuous
voice, such as I had never heard from her lips, "Arthur! Oh,
my love, I am so glad you have come! Kiss me!"

Arthur bent eagerly over to kiss her, but at that in-
stant Van Helsing, who, like me, had been startled by her
voice, swooped upon him, and catching him by the neck with
both hands, dragged him back with a fury of strength which
I never thought he could have possessed, and actually hurl-
ed him almost across the room.

"Not on your life!" he said, "not for your living soul
and hers!" And he stood between them like a lion at bay.

Arthur was so taken aback that he did not for a moment
know what to do or say, and before any impulse of violence
could seize him he realized the place and the occasion, and
stood silent, waiting.

I kept my eyes fixed on Lucy, as did Van Helsing, and
we saw a spasm as of rage flit like a shadow over her face.
The sharp teeth clamped together. Then her eyes closed, and
she breathed heavily.

Very shortly after she opened her eyes in all their
softness, and putting out her poor, pale, thin hand, took
Van Helsing's great brown one, drawing it close to her, she
kissed it. "My true friend," she said, in a faint voice, but
with untellable pathos, "My true friend, and his! Oh, guard
him, and give me peace!"

"I swear it!" he said solemnly, kneeling beside her
and holding up his hand, as one who registers an oath. Then
he turned to Arthur, and said to him, "Come, my child, take
her hand in yours, and kiss her on the forehead, and only
once."

Their eyes met instead of their lips, and so they part-
ed. Lucy's eyes closed, and Van Helsing, who had been watch-
ing closely, took Arthur's arm, and drew him away.

And then Lucy's breathing became stertorous again, and
all at once it ceased.

"It is all over," said Van Helsing. "She is dead!"

I took Arthur by the arm, and led him away to the draw-
ing room, where he sat down, and covered his face with his
hands, sobbing in a way that nearly broke me down to see.

I went back to the room, and found Van Helsing looking
at poor Lucy, and his face was sterner than eve. Some change
had come over her body. Death had given back part of her
beauty, for her brow and cheeks had recovered some of their
flowing lines. Even the lips had lost their deadly pallor.
It was as if the blood, no longer needed for the working of
the heart, had gone to make the harshness of death as little
rude as might be.

"We thought her dying whilst she slept,
And sleeping when she died."


I stood beside Van Helsing, and said, "Ah well, poor
girl, there is peace for her at last. It is the end!"

He turned to me, and said with grave solemnity, "Not so,
alas! Not so. It is only the beginning!"

When I asked him what he meant, he only shook his head
and answered, "We can do nothing as yet. Wait and see."





CHAPTER 13


DR. SEWARD'S DIARY--cont.


The funeral was arranged for the next succeeding day,
so that Lucy and her mother might be buried together. I
attended to all the ghastly formalities, and the urbane
undertaker proved that his staff was afflicted, or blessed,
with something of his own obsequious suavity. Even the
woman who performed the last offices for the dead remarked
to me, in a confidential, brother-professional way, when
she had come out from the death chamber,

"She makes a very beautiful corpse, sir. It's quite
a privilege to attend on her. It's not too much to say that
she will do credit to our establishment!"

I noticed that Van Helsing never kept far away. This
was possible from the disordered state of things in the
household. There were no relatives at hand, and as Arthur
had to be back the next day to attend at his father's fun-
eral, we were unable to notify any one who should have been
bidden. Under the circumstances, Van Helsing and I took it
upon ourselves to examine papers, etc. He insisted upon
looking over Lucy's papers himself. I asked him why, for I
feared that he, being a foreigner, might not be quite aware
of English legal requirements, and so might in ignorance make
some unnecessary trouble.

He answered me, "I know, I know. You forget that I am a
lawyer as well as a doctor. But this is not altogether for
the law. You knew that, when you avoided the coroner. I
have more than him to avoid. There may be papers more, such
as this."

As he spoke he took from his pocket book the memorandum
which had been in Lucy's breast, and which she had torn in
her sleep.

"When you find anything of the solicitor who is for the
late Mrs. Westenra, seal all her papers, and write him tonight.
For me, I watch here in the room and in Miss Lucy's old room
all night, and I myself search for what may be. It is not
well that her very thoughts go into the hands of strangers."

I went on with my part of the work, and in another half
hour had found the name and address of Mrs. Westenra's sol-
icitor and had written to him. All the poor lady's papers
were in order. Explicit directions regarding the place of
burial were given. I had hardly sealed the letter, when, to
my surprise, Van Helsing walked into the room, saying,

"Can I help you friend John? I am free, and if I may,
my service is to you."

"Have you got what you looked for?" I asked.

To which he replied, "I did not look for any specific
thing. I only hoped to find, and find I have, all that there
was, only some letters and a few memoranda, and a diary new
begun. But I have them here, and we shall for the present
say nothing of them. I shall see that poor lad tomorrow
evening, and, with his sanction, I shall use some."

When we had finished the work in hand, he said to me,
"And now, friend John, I think we may to bed. We want sleep,
both you and I, and rest to recuperate. Tomorrow we shall
have much to do, but for the tonight there is no need of us.
Alas!"

Before turning in we went to look at poor Lucy. The
undertaker had certainly done his work well, for the room
was turned into a small chapelle ardente. There was a wild-
erness of beautiful white flowers, and death was made as
little repulsive as might be. The end of the winding sheet
was laid over the face. When the Professor bent over and
turned it gently back, we both started at the beauty before
us. The tall wax candles showing a sufficient light to note
it well. All Lucy's loveliness had come back to her in death,
and the hours that had passed, instead of leaving traces of
`decay's effacing fingers', had but restored the beauty of
life, till positively I could not believe my eyes that I was
looking at a corpse.

The Professor looked sternly grave. He had not loved
her as I had, and there was no need for tears in his eyes.
He said to me, "Remain till I return," and left the room. He
came back with a handful of wild garlic from the box waiting
in the hall, but which had not been opened, and placed the
flowers amongst the others on and around the bed. Then he
took from his neck, inside his collar, a little gold cruci-
fix, and placed it over the mouth. He restored the sheet to
its place, and we came away.

I was undressing in my own room, when, with a premoni-
tory tap at the door, he entered, and at once began to speak.

"Tomorrow I want you to bring me, before night, a set
of post-mortem knives."

"Must we make an autopsy?" I asked.

"Yes and no. I want to operate, but not what you think.
Let me tell you now, but not a word to another. I want to
cut off her head and take out her heart. Ah! You a surgeon,
and so shocked! You, whom I have seen with no tremble of
hand or heart, do operations of life and death that make the
rest shudder. Oh, but I must not forget, my dear friend
John, that you loved her, and I have not forgotten it for is
I that shall operate, and you must not help. I would like to
do it tonight, but for Arthur I must not. He will be free
after his father's funeral tomorrow, and he will want to see
her, to see it. Then, when she is coffined ready for the
next day, you and I shall come when all sleep. We shall
unscrew the coffin lid, and shall do our operation, and then
replace all, so that none know, save we alone."

"But why do it at all? The girl is dead. Why mutilate
her poor body without need? And if there is no necessity for
a post-mortem and nothing to gain by it, no good to her, to
us, to science, to human knowledge, why do it? Without such
it is monstrous."

For answer he put his hand on my shoulder, and said,
with infinite tenderness, "Friend John, I pity your poor
bleeding heart, and I love you the more because it does so
bleed. If I could, I would take on myself the burden that
you do bear. But there are things that you know not, but
that you shall know, and bless me for knowing, though they
are not pleasant things. John, my child, you have been my
friend now many years, and yet did you ever know me to do
any without good cause? I may err, I am but man, but I be-
lieve in all I do. Was it not for these causes that you
send for me when the great trouble came? Yes! Were you not
amazed, nay horrified, when I would not let Arthur kiss his
love, though she was dying, and snatched him away by all my
strength? Yes! And yet you saw how she thanked me, with her
so beautiful dying eyes, her voice, too, so weak, and she
kiss my rough old hand and bless me? Yes! And did you not
hear me swear promise to her, that so she closed her eyes
grateful? Yes!

"Well, I have good reason now for all I want to do. You
have for many years trust me. You have believe me weeks past,
when there be things so strange that you might have well
doubt. Believe me yet a little, friend John. If you trust me
not, then I must tell what I think, and that is not perhaps
well. And if I work, as work I shall, no matter trust or no
trust, without my friend trust in me, I work with heavy heart
and feel, oh so lonely when I want all help and courage that
may be!" He paused a moment and went on solemnly, "Friend
John, there are strange and terrible days before us. Let us
not be two, but one, that so we work to a good end. Will you
not have faith in me?"

I took his hand, and promised him. I held my door open
as he went away, and watched him go to his room and close the
door. As I stood without moving, I saw one of the maids pass
silently along the passage, she had her back to me, so did
not see me, and go into the room where Lucy lay. The sight
touched me. Devotion is so rare, and we are so grateful to
those who show it unasked to those we love. Here was a poor
girl putting aside the terrors which she naturally had of
death to go watch alone by the bier of the mistress whom she
loved, so that the poor clay might not be lonely till laid
to eternal rest.

I must have slept long and soundly, for it was broad
daylight when Van Helsing waked me by coming into my room.
He came over to my bedside and said, "You need not trouble
about the knives. We shall not do it."

"Why not?" I asked. For his solemnity of the night
before had greatly impressed me.

"Because," he said sternly, "it is too late, or too
early. See!" Here he held up the little golden crucifix.

"This was stolen in the night."

"How stolen, "I asked in wonder, "since you have it now?"

"Because I get it back from the worthless wretch who
stole it, from the woman who robbed the dead and the living.
Her punishment will surely come, but not through me. She
knew not altogether what she did, and thus unknowing, she
only stole. Now we must wait." He went away on the word,
leaving me with a new mystery to think of, a new puzzle to
grapple with.

The forenoon was a dreary time, but at noon the solici-
tor came, Mr. Marquand, of Wholeman, Sons, Marquand & Lidder-
dale. He was very genial and very appreciative of what we
had done, and took off our hands all cares as to details.
During lunch he told us that Mrs. Westenra had for some time
expected sudden death from her heart, and had put her affairs
in absolute order. He informed us that, with the exception
of a certain entailed property of Lucy's father which now,
in default of direct issue, went back to a distant branch of
the family, the whole estate, real and personal, was left
absolutely to Arthur Holmwood. When he had told us so much
he went on,

"Frankly we did our best to prevent such a testamentary
disposition, and pointed out certain contingencies that might
leave her daughter either penniless or not so free as she
should be to act regarding a matrimonial alliance. Indeed,
we pressed the matter so far that we almost came into colli-
sion, for she asked us if we were or were not prepared to
carry out her wishes. Of course, we had then no alternative
but to accept. We were right in principle, and ninety-nine
times out of a hundred we should have proved, by the logic of
events, the accuracy of our judgment.

"Frankly, however, I must admit that in this case any
other form of disposition would have rendered impossible the
carrying out of her wishes. For by her predeceasing her
daughter the latter would have come into possession of the
property, and, even had she only survived her mother by five
minutes, her property would, in case there were no will, and
a will was a practical impossibility in such a case, have
been treated at her decease as under intestacy. In which
case Lord Godalming, though so dear a friend, would have had
no claim in the world. And the inheritors, being remote,
would not be likely to abandon their just rights, for senti-
mental reasons regarding an entire stranger. I assure you,
my dear sirs, I am rejoiced at the result, perfectly rejoiced."

He was a good fellow, but his rejoicing at the one
little part, in which he was officially interested, of so
great a tragedy, was an object-lesson in the limitations of
sympathetic understanding.

He did not remain long, but said he would look in later
in the day and see Lord Godalming. His coming, however, had
been a certain comfort to us, since it assured us that we
should not have to dread hostile criticism as to any of our
acts.  Arthur was expected at five o'clock, so a little before
that time we visited the death chamber. It was so in very
truth, for now both mother and daughter lay in it. The under-
taker, true to his craft, had made the best display he could
of his goods, and there was a mortuary air about the place
that lowered our spirits at once.

Van Helsing ordered the former arrangement to be adher-
ed to, explaining that, as Lord Godalming was coming very
soon, it would be less harrowing to his feelings to see all
that was left of his fiancee quite alone.

The undertaker seemed shocked at his own stupidity and
exerted himself to restore things to the condition in which
we left them the night before, so that when Arthur came such
shocks to his feelings as we could avoid were saved.

Poor fellow! He looked desperately sad and broken. Even
his stalwart manhood seemed to have shrunk somewhat under
the strain of his much-tried emotions. He had, I knew, been
very genuinely and devotedly attached to his father, and to
lose him, and at such a time, was a bitter blow to him. With
me he was warm as ever, and to Van Helsing he was sweetly
courteous. But I could not help seeing that there was some
constraint with him. The professor noticed it too, and
motioned me to bring him upstairs. I did so, and left him
at the door of the room, as I felt he would like to be
quite alone with her, but he took my arm and led me in, say-
ing huskily,

"You loved her too, old fellow. She told me all about
it, and there was no friend had a closer place in her heart
than you. I don't know how to thank you for all you have
done for her. I can't think yet. . ."

Here he suddenly broke down, and threw his arms round
my shoulders and laid his head on my breast, crying, "Oh,
Jack! Jack! What shall I do? The whole of life seems gone
from me all at once, and there is nothing in the wide world
for me to live for."

I comforted him as well as I could. In such cases men
do not need much expression. A grip of the hand, the tight-
ening of an arm over the shoulder, a sob in unison, are ex-
pressions of sympathy dear to a man's heart. I stood still
and silent till his sobs died away, and then I said softly to
him, "Come and look at her."

Together we moved over to the bed, and I lifted the lawn
from her face. God! How beautiful she was. Every hour seem-
ed to be enhancing her loveliness. It frightened and amazed
me somewhat. And as for Arthur, he fell to trembling, and
finally was shaken with doubt as with an ague.  At last, after
a long pause, he said to me in a faint whisper, "Jack, is she
really dead?"

I assured him sadly that it was so, and went on to sug-
gest, for I felt that such a horrible doubt should not have
life for a moment longer than I could help, that it often
happened that after death faces become softened and even
resolved into their youthful beauty, that this was especially
so when death had been preceded by any acute or prolonged
suffering. I seemed to quite do away with any doubt, and af-
ter kneeling beside the couch for a while and looking at her
lovingly and long, he turned aside. I told him that that must
be goodbye, as the coffin had to be prepared, so he went back
and took her dead hand in his and kissed it, and bent over
and kissed her forehead. He came away, fondly looking back
over his shoulder at her as he came.

I left him in the drawing room, and told Van Helsing
that he had said goodbye, so the latter went to the kitchen
to tell the undertaker's men to proceed with the prepera-
tions and to screw up the coffin. When he came out of the
room again I told him of Arthur's question, and he replied,
"I am not surprised. Just now I doubted for a moment myself!"

We all dined together, and I could see that poor Art
was trying to make the best of things. Van Helsing had been
silent all dinner time, but when we had lit our cigars he
said, "Lord. . ., but Arthur interrupted him.

"No, no, not that, for God's sake! Not yet at any rate.
Forgive me, sir. I did not mean to speak offensively. It is
only because my loss is so recent."

The Professor answered very sweetly, "I only used that
name because I was in doubt. I must not call you `Mr.' and
I have grown to love you, yes, my dear boy, to love you, as
Arthur."

Arthur held out his hand, and took the old man's warmly.
"Call me what you will," he said. "I hope I may always have
the title of a friend. And let me say that I am at a loss
for words to thank you for your goodness to my poor dear."
He paused a moment, and went on, "I know that she understood
your goodness even better than I do. And if I was rude or in
any way wanting at that time you acted so, you remember,"--
the Professor nodded--"You must forgive me."

He answered with a grave kindness, "I know it was hard
for you to quite trust me then, for to trust such violence
needs to understand, and I take it that you do not, that you
cannot, trust me now, for you do not yet understand. And
there may be more times when I shall want you to trust when
you cannot, and may not, and must not yet understand.  But the
time will come when your trust shall be whole and complete
in me, and when you shall understand as though the sunlight
himself shone through. Then you shall bless me from first to
last for your own sake, and for the sake of others, and for
her dear sake to whom I swore to protect."

"And indeed, indeed, sir," said Arthur warmly. "I shall
in all ways trust you. I know and believe you have a very
noble heart, and you are Jack's friend, and you were hers.
You shall do what you like."

The Professor cleared his throat a couple of times, as
though about to speak, and finally said, "May I ask you
something now?"

"Certainly."

"You know that Mrs. Westenra left you all her property?"

"No, poor dear. I never thought of it."

"And as it is all yours, you have a right to deal with
it as you will. I want you to give me permission to read all
Miss Lucy's papers and letters. Believe me, it is no idle
curiosity. I have a motive of which, be sure, she would have
approved. I have them all here. I took them before we knew
that all was yours, so that no strange hand might touch them,
no strange eye look through words into her soul. I shall
keep them, if I may. Even you may not see them yet, but I
shall keep them safe. No word shall be lost, and in the
good time I shall give them back to you. It is a hard thing
that I ask, but you will do it, will you not, for Lucy's
sake?"

Arthur spoke out heartily, like his old self, "Dr. Van
Helsing, you may do what you will. I feel that in saying
this I am doing what my dear one would have approved. I
shall not trouble you with questions till the time comes."

The old Professor stood up as he said solemnly, "And you
are right. There will be pain for us all, but it will not be
all pain, nor will this pain be the last. We and you too, you
most of all, dear boy, will have to pass through the bitter
water before we reach the sweet. But we must be brave of
heart and unselfish, and do our duty, and all will be well!"

I slept on a sofa in Arthur's room that night. Van Hel-
sing did not go to bed at all. He went to and fro, as if
patroling the house, and was never out of sight of the room
where Lucy lay in her coffin, strewn with the wild garlic
flowers, which sent through the odor of lily and rose, a
heavy, overpowering smell into the night.




MINA HARKER'S JOURNAL


22 September.--In the train to Exeter. Jonathan sleep-
ing. It seems only yesterday that the last entry was made,
and yet how much between then, in Whitby and all the world
before me, Jonathan away and no news of him, and now, marr-
ied to Jonathan, Jonathan a solicitor, a partner, rich, mas-
ter of his business, Mr. Hawkins dead and buried, and Jona-
than with another attack that may harm him. Some day he may
ask me about it. Down it all goes. I am rusty in my short-
hand, see what unexpected prosperity does for us, so it may
be as well to freshen it up again with an exercise anyhow.

The service was very simple and very solemn. There were
only ourselves and the servants there, one or two old friends
of his from Exeter, his London agent, and a gentleman repre-
senting Sir John Paxton, the President of the Incorporated
Law Society. Jonathan and I stood hand in hand, and we felt
that our best and dearest friend was gone from us.

We came back to town quietly, taking a bus to Hyde Park
Corner. Jonathan thought it would interest me to go into
the Row for a while, so we sat down. But there were very
few people there, and it was sad-looking and desolate to see
so many empty chairs. It made us think of the empty chair at
home. So we got up and walked down Piccadilly. Jonathan was
holding me by the arm, the way he used to in the old days
before I went to school. I felt it very improper, for you
can't go on for some years teaching etiquette and decorum to
other girls without the pedantry of it biting into yourself
a bit. But it was Jonathan, and he was my husband, and we
didn't know anybody who saw us, and we didn't care if they
did, so on we walked. I was looking at a very beautiful girl,
in a big cart-wheel hat, sitting in a victoria outside Guil-
iano's, when I felt Jonathan clutch my arm so tight that he
hurt me, and he said under his breath, "My God!"

I am always anxious about Jonathan, for I fear that
some nervous fit may upset him again. So I turned to him
quickly, and asked him what it was that disturbed him.

He was very pale, and his eyes seemed bulging out as,
half in terror and half in amazement, he gazed at a tall,
thin man, with a beaky nose and black moustache and pointed
beard, who was also observing the pretty girl. He was looking
at her so hard that he did not see either of us, and so I had
a good view of him. His face was not a good face. It was
hard, and cruel, and sensual, and big white teeth, that looked
all the whiter because his lips were so red, were pointed
like an animal's. Jonathan kept staring at him, till I was
afraid he would notice. I feared he might take it ill, he
looked so fierce and nasty. I asked Jonathan why he was dis-
turbed, and he answered, evidently thinking that I knew as
much about it as he did, "Do you see who it is?"

"No, dear," I said. "I don't know him, who is it?"
His answer seemed to shock and thrill me, for it was said as
if he did not know that it was me, Mina, to whom he was
speaking. "It is the man himself!"

The poor dear was evidently terrified at something, very
greatly terrified. I do believe that if he had not had me
to lean on and to support him he would have sunk down. He
kept staring. A man came out of the shop with a small parcel,
and gave it to the lady, who then drove off. Th e dark man
kept his eyes fixed on her, and when the carriage moved up
Piccadilly he followed in the same direction, and hailed a
hansom. Jonathan kept looking after him, and said, as if to
himself,

"I believe it is the Count, but he has grown young. My
God, if this be so! Oh, my God! My God! If only I knew! If
only I knew!" He was distressing himself so much that I fear-
ed to keep his mind on the subject by asking him any ques-
tions, so I remained silent. I drew away quietly, and he,
holding my arm, came easily. We walked a little further, and
then went in and sat for a while in the Green Park. It was
a hot day for autumn, and there was a comfortable seat in a
shady place. After a few minutes' staring at nothing, Jona-
than's eyes closed, and he went quickly into a sleep, with
his head on my shoulder. I thought it was the best thing for
him, so did not disturb him. In about twenty minutes he woke
up, and said to me quite cheerfully,

"Why, Mina, have I been asleep! Oh, do forgive me for
being so rude. Come, and we'll have a cup of tea somewhere."

He had evidently forgotten all about the dark stranger,
as in his illness he had forgotten all that this episode
had reminded him of. I don't like this lapsing into forget-
fulness. It may make or continue some injury to the brain.
I must not ask him, for fear I shall do more harm than good,
but I must somehow learn the facts of his journey abroad. The
time is come, I fear, when I must open the parcel, and know
what is written. Oh, Jonathan, you will, I know, forgive me
if I do wrong, but it is for your own dear sake.


Later.--A sad home-coming in every way, the house empty
of the dear soul who was so good to us. Jonathan still pale
and dizzy under a slight relapse of his malady, and now a
telegram from Van Helsing, whoever he may be. "You will be
grieved to hear that Mrs. Westenra died five days ago, and
that Lucy died the day before yesterday. They were both
buried today."

Oh, what a wealth of sorrow in a few words! Poor Mrs.
Westenra! Poor Lucy! Gone, gone, never to return to us!
And poor, poor Arthur, to have lost such a sweetness out of
his life! God help us all to bear our troubles.


DR. SEWARD'S DIARY-CONT.


22 September.--It is all over. Arthur has gone back to
Ring, and has taken Quincey Morris with him. What a fine
fellow is Quincey! I believe in my heart of hearts that he
suffered as much about Lucy's death as any of us, but he bore
himself through it like a moral Viking. If America can go on
breeding men like that, she will be a power in the world in-
deed. Van Helsing is lying down, having a rest preparatory
to his journey. He goes to Amsterdam tonight, but says he
returns tomorrow night, that he only wants to make some
arrangements which can only be made personally. He is to
stop with me then, if he can. He says he has work to do in
London which may take him some time. Poor old fellow! I fear
that the strain of the past week has broken down even his
iron strength.  All the time of the burial he was, I could see,
putting some terrible restraint on himself. When it was all
over, we were standing beside Arthur, who, poor fellow, was
speaking of his part in the operation where his blood had
been transfused to his Lucy's veins. I could see Van Hel-
sing's face grow white and purple by turns. Arthur was
saying that he felt since then as if they two had been
really married, and that she was his wife in the sight of God.
None of us said a word of the other operations, and none of
us ever shall. Arthur and Quincey went away together to the
station, and Van Helsing and I came on here. The moment we
were alone in the carriage he gave way to a regular fit of
hysterics. He has denied to me since that it was hysterics,
and insisted that it was only his sense of humor asserting
itself under very terrible conditions. He laughed till he
cried, and I had to draw down the blinds lest any one should
see us and misjudge.  And then he cried, till he laughed again,
and laughed and cried together, just as a woman does. I tried
to be stern with him, as one is to a woman under the circum-
stances, but it had no effect. Men and women are so different
in manifestations of nervous strength or weakness! Then when
his face grew grave and stern again I asked him why his
mirth, and why at such a time. His reply was in a way char-
acteristic of him, for it was logical and forceful and mys-
terious. He said,

"Ah, you don't comprehend, friend John. Do not think
that I am not sad, though I laugh. See, I have cried even
when the laugh did choke me. But no more think that I am all
sorry when I cry, for the laugh he come just the same. Keep
it always with you that laughter who knock at your door and
say, `May I come in?' is not true laughter. No! He is a king,
and he come when and how he like. He ask no person, he choose
no time of suitability. He say, `I am here.' Behold, in ex-
ample I grieve my heart out for that so sweet young girl. I
give my blood for her, though I am old and worn. I give my
time, my skill, my sleep. I let my other sufferers want that
she may have all. And yet I can laugh at her very grave,
laugh when the clay from the spade of the sexton drop upon
her coffin and say `Thud, thud!' to my heart, till it send
back the blood from my cheek. My heart bleed for that poor
boy, that dear boy, so of the age of mine own boy had I been
so blessed that he live, and with his hair and eyes the same.

"There, you know now why I love him so. And yet when
he say things that touch my husband-heart to the quick, and
make my father-heart yearn to him as to no other man, not
even you, friend John, for we are more level in experiences
than father and son, yet even at such a moment King Laugh he
come to me and shout and bellow in my ear,`Here I am! Here I
am!' till the blood come dance back and bring some of the
sunshine that he carry with him to my cheek. Oh, friend John,
it is a strange world, a sad world, a world full of miseries,
and woes, and troubles.  And yet when King Laugh come, he make
them all dance to the tune he play. Bleeding hearts, and dry
bones of the churchyard, and tears that burn as they fall,
all dance together to the music that he make with that smile-
less mouth of him. And believe me, friend John, that he is
good to come, and kind. Ah, we men and women are like ropes
drawn tight with strain that pull us different ways. Then
tears come, and like the rain on the ropes, they brace us up,
until perhaps the strain become too great, and we break. But
King Laugh he come like the sunshine, and he ease off the
strain again, and we bear to go on with our labor, what it
may be."

I did not like to wound him by pretending not to see
his idea, but as I did not yet understand the cause of his
laughter, I asked him. As he answered me his face grew
stern, and he said in quite a different tone,

"Oh, it was the grim irony of it all, this so lovely lady
garlanded with flowers, that looked so fair as life, till one
by one we wondered if she were truly dead, she laid in that
so fine marble house in that lonely churchyard, where rest so
many of her kin, laid there with the mother who loved her,
and whom she loved, and that sacred bell going "Toll! Toll!
Toll!' so sad and slow, and those holy men, with the white
garments of the angel, pretending to read books, and yet all
the time their eyes never on the page, and all of us with the
bowed head. And all for what? She is dead, so! Is it not?"

"Well, for the life of me, Professor," I said, "I can't
see anything to laugh at in all that. Why, your expression
makes it a harder puzzle than before. But even if the burial
service was comic, what about poor Art and his trouble? Why
his heart was simply breaking."

"Just so. Said he not that the transfusion of his blood
to her veins had made her truly his bride?"

"Yes, and it was a sweet and comforting idea for him."

"Quite so. But there was a difficulty, friend John. If
so that, then what about the others? Ho, ho! Then this so
sweet maid is a polyandrist, and me, with my poor wife dead to
me, but alive by Church's law, though no wits, all gone, even
I, who am faithful husband to this now-no-wife, am bigamist."

"I don't see where the joke comes in there either!" I
said, and I did not feel particularly pleased with him for
saying such things. He laid his hand on my arm, and said,

"Friend John, forgive me if I pain. I showed not my
feeling to others when it would wound, but only to you, my
old friend, whom I can trust. If you could have looked in-
to my heart then when I want to laugh, if you could have done
so when the laugh arrived, if you could do so now, when King
Laugh have pack up his crown, and all that is to him, for he
go far, far away from me, and for a long, long time, maybe
you would perhaps pity me the most of all."

I was touched by the tenderness of his tone, and asked
why.

"Because I know!"

And now we are all scattered, and for many a long day
loneliness will sit over our roofs with brooding wings. Lucy
lies in the tomb of her kin, a lordly death house in a lonely
churchyard, away from teeming London, where the air is fresh,
and the sun rises over Hampstead Hill, and where wild flowers
grow of their own accord.

So I can finish this diary, and God only knows if I
shall ever begin another. If I do, or if I even open this
again, it will be to deal with different people and differ-
ent themes, for here at the end, where the romance of my life
is told, ere I go back to take up the thread of my life-work,
I say sadly and without hope, "FINIS".




THE WESTMINSTER GAZETTE, 25 SEPTEMBER
A HAMPSTEAD MYSTERY


The neighborhood of Hampstead is just at present exer-
cised with a series of events which seem to run on lines
parallel to those of what was known to the writers of head-
lines and "The Kensington Horror," or "The Stabbing Woman,"
or "The Woman in Black." During the past two or three days
several cases have occurred of young children straying from
home or neglecting to return from their playing on the Heath.
In all these cases the children were too young to give any
properly intelligible account of themselves, but the consen-
sus of their excuses is that they had been with a "bloofer
lady." It has always been late in the evening when they have
been missed, and on two occasions the children have not been
found until early in the following morning. It is generally
supposed in the neighborhood that, as the first child missed
gave as his reason for being away that a "bloofer lady" had
asked him to come for a walk, the others had picked up the
phrase and used it as occasion served. This is the more nat-
ural as the favorite game of the little ones at present is
luring each other away by wiles. A correspondent writes us
that to see some of the tiny tots pretending to be the"bloo-
fer lady" is supremely funny. Some of our caricaturists might,
he says, take a lesson in the irony of grotesque by comparing
the reality and the picture. It is only in accordance with
general principles of human nature that the "bloofer lady"
should be the popular role at these al fresco performances.
Our correspondent naively says that even Ellen Terry could
not be so winningly attractive as some of these grubby-faced
little children pretend, and even imagine themselves, to be.

There is, however, possibly a serious side to the ques-
tion, for some of the children, indeed all who have been
missed at night, have been slightly torn or wounded in the
throat. The wounds seem such as might be made by a rat or a
small dog, and although of not much importance individually,
would tend to show that whatever animal inflicts them has a
system or method of its own. The police of the division
have been instructed to keep a sharp lookout for straying
children, especially when very young, in and around Hamp-
stead Heath, and for any stray dog which may be about.




THE WESTMINSTER GAZETTE, 25 SEPTEMBER
EXTRA SPECIAL

THE HAMPSTEAD HORROR


ANOTHER CHILD INJURED

THE "BLOOFER LADY"


We have just received intelligence that another child,
missed last night, was only discovered late in the morning
under a furze bush at the Shooter's Hill side of Hampstead
Heath, which is perhaps, less frequented than the other parts.
It has the same tiny wound in the throat as has been noticed
in other cases. It was terribly weak, and looked quite ema-
ciated. It too, when partially restored, had the common story
to tell of being lured away by the "bloofer lady".





CHAPTER 14


MINA HARKER'S JOURNAL


23 September.--Jonathan is better after a bad night. I
am so glad that he has plenty of work to do, for that keeps
his mind off the terrible things, and oh, I am rejoiced that
he is not now weighed down with the responsibility of his
new position. I knew he would be true to himself, and now
how proud I am to see my Jonathan rising to the height of
his advancement and keeping pace in all ways with the duties
that come upon him. He will be away all day till late, for
he said he could not lunch at home. My household work is
done, so I shall take his foreign journal, and lock myself
up in my room and read it.


24 September.--I hadn't the heart to write last night,
that terrible record of Jonathan's upset me so. Poor dear!
How he must have suffered, whether it be true or only imag-
ination. I wonder if there is any truth in it at all. Did
he get his brain fever, and then write all those terrible
things, or had he some cause for it all? I suppose I shall
never know, for I dare not open the subject to him. And yet
that man we saw yesterday! He seemed quite certain of him,
poor fellow! I suppose it was the funeral upset him and sent
his mind back on some train of thought.

He believes it all himself. I remember how on our wedd-
ing day he said "Unless some solemn duty come upon me to go
back to the bitter hours, asleep or awake, mad or sane. . ."
There seems to be through it all some thread of continuity.
That fearful Count was coming to London. If it should be,
and he came to London, with its teeming millions. . .There
may be a solemn duty, and if it come we must not shrink from
it. I shall be prepared. I shall get my typewriter this very
hour and begin transcribing. Then we shall be ready for other
eyes if required. And if it be wanted, then, perhaps, if I
am ready, poor Jonathan may not be upset, for I can speak for
him and never let him be troubled or worried with it at all.
If ever Jonathan quite gets over the nervousness he may want
to tell me of it all, and I can ask him questions and find
out things, and see how I may comfort him.




LETTER, VAN HELSING TO MRS. HARKER


24 September

(Confidence)

"Dear Madam,

"I pray you to pardon my writing, in that I am so far
friend as that I sent to you sad news of Miss Lucy Westenra's
death. By the kindness of Lord Godalming, I am empowered to
read her letters and papers, for I am deeply concerned about
certain matters vitally important. In them I find some
letters from you, which show how great friends you were and
how you love her. Oh, Madam Mina, by that love, I implore
you, help me. It is for others' good that I ask, to redress
great wrong, and to lift much and terrible troubles, that
may be more great than you can know. May it be that I see
you? You can trust me. I am friend of Dr. John Seward and
of Lord Godalming (that was Arthur of Miss Lucy). I must
keep it private for the present from all. I should come to
Exeter to see you at once if you tell me I am privilege to
come, and where and when. I implore your pardon, Madam. I
have read your letters to poor Lucy, and know how good you
are and how your husband suffer. So I pray you, if it may
be, enlighten him not, least it may harm. Again your pardon,
and forgive me.

"VAN HELSING"




TELEGRAM, MRS. HARKER TO VAN HELSING


25 September.--Come today by quarter past ten train if
you can catch it. Can see you any time you call.
"WILHELMINA HARKER"




MINA HARKER'S JOURNAL


25 September.--I cannot help feeling terribly excited
as the time draws near for the visit of Dr. Van Helsing, for
somehow I expect that it will throw some light upon Jona-
than's sad experience, and as he attended poor dear Lucy in
her last illness, he can tell me all about her. That is the
reason of his coming. It is concerning Lucy and her sleep-
walking, and not about Jonathan. Then I shall never know
the real truth now! How silly I am. That awful journal gets
hold of my imagination and tinges everything with something
of its own color. Of course it is about Lucy. That habit
came back to the poor dear, and that awful night on the cliff
must have made her ill. I had almost forgotten in my own
affairs how ill she was afterwards. She must have told him
of her sleep-walking adventure on the cliff, and that I knew
all about it, and now he wants me to tell him what I know, so
that he may understand. I hope I did right in not saying
anything of it to Mrs. Westenra. I should never forgive my-
self if any act of mine, were it even a negative one, brought
harm on poor dear Lucy. I hope too, Dr. Van Helsing will not
blame me. I have had so much trouble and anxiety of late
that I feel I cannot bear more just at present.

I suppose a cry does us all good at times, clears the
air as other rain does. Perhaps it was reading the journal
yesterday that upset me, and then Jonathan went away this
morning to stay away from me a whole day and night, the first
time we have been parted since our marriage. I do hope the
dear fellow will take care of himself, and that nothing will
occur to upset him. It is two o'clock, and the doctor will
be here soon now. I shall say nothing of Jonathan's journal
unless he asks me. I am so glad I have typewritten out my
own journal, so that, in case he asks about Lucy, I can hand
it to him. It will save much questioning.

Later.--He has come and gone. Oh, what a strange meet-
ing, and how it all makes my head whirl round. I feel like
one in a dream. Can it be all possible, or even a part of it?
If I had not read Jonathan's journal first, I should never
have accepted even a possibility. Poor, poor, dear Jonathan!
How he must have suffered. Please the good God, all this may
not upset him again. I shall try to save him from it. But
it may be even a consolation and a help to him, terrible
though it be and awful in its consequences, to know for cer-
tain that his eyes and ears and brain did not deceive him,
and that it is all true. It may be that it is the doubt which
haunts him, that when the doubt is removed, no matter which,
waking or dreaming, may prove the truth, he will be more
satisfied and better able to bear the shock. Dr. Van Helsing
must be a good man as well as a clever one if he is Arthur's
friend and Dr. Seward's, and if they brought him all the way
from Holland to look after Lucy. I feel from having seen him
that he is good and kind and of a noble nature. When he
comes tomorrow I shall ask him about Jonathan. And then,
please God, all this sorrow and anxiety may lead to a good
end. I used to think I would like to practice interviewing.
Jonathan's friend on "The Exeter News" told him that memory
is everything in such work, that you must be able to put
down exactly almost every word spoken, even if you had to
refine some of it afterwards. Here was a rare interview. I
shall try to record it verbatim.

It was half-past two o'clock when the knock came. I
took my courage a deux mains and waited. In a few minutes
Mary opened the door, and announced "Dr. Van Helsing".

I rose and bowed, and he came towards me, a man of med-
ium weight, strongly built, with his shoulders set back over
a broad, deep chest and a neck well balanced on the trunk as
the head is on the neck. The poise of the head strikes me at
once as indicative of thought and power. The head is noble,
well-sized, broad, and large behind the ears. The face, clean-
shaven, shows a hard, square chin, a large resolute, mobile
mouth, a good-sized nose, rather straight, but with quick,
sensitive nostrils, that seem to broaden as the big bushy
brows come down and the mouth tightens. The forehead is broad
and fine, rising at first almost straight and then sloping
back above two bumps or ridges wide apart, such a forehead
that the reddish hair cannot possibly tumble over it, but
falls naturally back and to the sides. Big, dark blue eyes
are set widely apart, and are quick and tender or stern with
the man's moods. He said to me,

"Mrs. Harker, is it not?" I bowed assent.

"That was Miss Mina Murray?" Again I assented.

"It is Mina Murray that I came to see that was friend
of that poor dear child Lucy Westenra. Madam Mina, it is on
account of the dead that I come."

"Sir," I said, "you could have no better claim on me
than that you were a friend and helper of Lucy Westenra."And
I held out my hand. He took it and said tenderly,

"Oh, Madam Mina, I know that the friend of that poor
little girl must be good, but I had yet to learn. . ." He
finished his speech with a courtly bow. I asked him what it
was that he wanted to see me about, so he at once began.

"I have read your letters to Miss Lucy. Forgive me, but
I had to begin to inquire somewhere, and there was none to
ask. I know that you were with her at Whitby. She sometimes
kept a diary, you need not look surprised, Madam Mina. It
was begun after you had left, and was an imitation of you,
and in that diary she traces by inference certain things to
a sleep-walking in which she puts down that you saved her. In
great perplexity then I come to you, and ask you out of your
so much kindness to tell me all of it that you can remember."

"I can tell you, I think, Dr. Van Helsing, all about
it."

"Ah, then you have good memory for facts, for details?
It is not always so with young ladies."

"No, doctor, but I wrote it all down at the time. I can
show it to you if you like."

"Oh, Madam Mina, I well be grateful. You will do me much
favor."

I could not resist the temptation of mystifying him a
bit, I suppose it is some taste of the original apple that
remains still in our mouths, so I handed him the shorthand
diary. He took it with a grateful bow, and said, "May I read
it?"

"If you wish," I answered as demurely as I could. He
opened it, and for an instant his face fell. Then he stood
up and bowed.

"Oh, you so clever woman!" he said. "I knew long that
Mr. Jonathan was a man of much thankfulness, but see, his
wife have all the good things.  And will you not so much honor
me and so help me as to read it for me? Alas! I know not
the shorthand."

By this time my little joke was over, and I was almost
ashamed. So I took the typewritten copy from my work basket
and handed it to him.

"Forgive me," I said. "I could not help it, but I had
been thinking that it was of dear Lucy that you wished to
ask, and so that you might not have time to wait, not on my
account, but because I know your time must be precious, I
have written it out on the typewriter for you."

He took it and his eyes glistened. "You are so good,"
he said. "And may I read it now? I may want to ask you some
things when I have read."

"By all means," I said. "read it over whilst I order
lunch, and then you can ask me questions whilst we eat."

He bowed and settled himself in a chair with his back
to the light, and became so absorbed in the papers, whilst I
went to see after lunch chiefly in order that he might not
be disturbed. When I came back, I found him walking hurried-
ly up and down the room, his face all ablaze with excitement.
He rushed up to me and took me by both hands.

"Oh, Madam Mina," he said, "how can I say what I owe to
you? This paper is as sunshine. It opens the gate to me. I
am dazed, I am dazzled, with so much light, and yet clouds
roll in behind the light every time. But that you do not,
cannot comprehend. Oh, but I am grateful to you, you so
clever woman. Madame," he said this very solemnly, "if ever
Abraham Van Helsing can do anything for you or yours, I trust
you will let me know. It will be pleasure and delight if I
may serve you as a friend, as a friend, but all I have ever
learned, all I can ever do, shall be for you and those you
love. There are darknesses in life, and there are lights.
You are one of the lights. You will have a happy life and a
good life, and your husband will be blessed in you."

"But, doctor, you praise me too much, and you do not
know me."

"Not know you, I, who am old, and who have studied all
my life men and women, I who have made my specialty the
brain and all that belongs to him and all that follow from
him! And I have read your diary that you have so goodly
written for me, and which breathes out truth in every line.
I, who have read your so sweet letter to poor Lucy of your
marriage and your trust, not know you! Oh, Madam Mina, good
women tell all their lives, and by day and by hour and by
minute, such things that angels can read. And we men who
wish to know have in us something of angels' eyes. Your
husband is noble nature, and you are noble too, for you
trust, and trust cannot be where there is mean nature. And
your husband, tell me of him. Is he quite well? Is all
that fever gone, and is he strong and hearty?"

I saw here an opening to ask him about Jonathan, so I
said, "He was almost recovered, but he has been greatly upset
by Mr. Hawkins death."

He interrupted, "Oh, yes. I know. I know. I have read
your last two letters."

I went on, "I suppose this upset him, for when we were
in town on Thursday last he had a sort of shock."

"A shock, and after brain fever so soon! That is not
good. What kind of shock was it?"

"He thought he saw some one who recalled something
terrible, something which led to his brain fever." And here
the whole thing seemed to overwhelm me in a rush. The pity
for Jonathan, the horror which he experienced, the whole
fearful mystery of his diary, and the fear that has been
brooding over me ever since, all came in a tumult. I suppose
I was hysterical, for I threw myself on my knees and held up
my hands to him, and implored him to make my husband well
again. He took my hands and raised me up, and made me sit
on the sofa, and sat by me. He held my hand in his, and said
to me with, oh, such infinite sweetness,

"My life is a barren and lonely one, and so full of work
that I have not had much time for friendships, but since I
have been summoned to here by my friend John Seward I have
known so many good people and seen such nobility that I feel
more than ever, and it has grown with my advancing years,
the loneliness of my life. Believe me, then, that I come
here full of respect for you, and you have given me hope,
hope, not in what I am seeking of, but that there are good
women still left to make life happy, good women, whose lives
and whose truths may make good lesson for the children that
are to be. I am glad, glad, that I may here be of some use
to you. For if your husband suffer, he suffer within the
range of my study and experience. I promise you that I will
gladly do all for him that I can, all to make his life strong
and manly, and your life a happy one. Now you must eat. You
are over-wrought and perhaps over-anxious. Husband Jonathan
would not like to see you so pale, and what he like not where
he love, is not to his good. Therefore for his sake you must
eat and smile. You have told me about Lucy, and so now we
shall not speak of it, lest it distress. I shall stay in Ex-
eter tonight, for I want to think much over what you have
told me, and when I have thought I will ask you questions, if
I may. And then too, you will tell me of husband Jonathan's
trouble so far as you can, but not yet. You must eat now,
afterwards you shall tell me all."

After lunch, when we went back to the drawing room, he
said to me, "And now tell me all about him."

When it came to speaking to this great learned man, I
began to fear that he would think me a weak fool, and Jona-
than a madman, that journal is all so strange, and I hesi-
tated to go on. But he was so sweet and kind, and he had
promised to help, and I trusted him, so I said,

"Dr. Van Helsing, what I have to tell you is so queer
that you must not laugh at me or at my husband. I have been
since yesterday in a sort of fever of doubt. You must be
kind to me, and not think me foolish that I have even half
believed some very strange things."

He reassured me by his manner as well as his words when
he said, "Oh, my dear, if you only know how strange is the
matter regarding which I am here, it is you who would laugh.
I have learned not to think little of any one's belief, no
matter how strange it may be. I have tried to keep an open
mind, and it is not the ordinary things of life that could
close it, but the strange things, the extraordinary things,
the things that make one doubt if they be mad or sane."

"Thank you, thank you a thousand times! You have taken
a weight off my mind. If you will let me, I shall give you
a paper to read. It is long, but I have typewritten it out.
It will tell you my trouble and Jonathan's. It is the copy of
his journal when abroad, and all that happened. I dare not
say anything of it. You will read for yourself and judge.
And then when I see you, perhaps, you will be very kind and
tell me what you think."

"I promise," he said as I gave him the papers. "I shall
in the morning, as soon as I can, come to see you and your
husband, if I may."

"Jonathan will be here at half-past eleven, and you must
come to lunch with us and see him then. You could catch the
quick 3:34 train, which will leave you at Paddington before
eight." He was surprised at my knowledge of the trains off-
hand, but he does not know that I have made up all the trains
to and from Exeter, so that I may help Jonathan in case he is
in a hurry.

So he took the papers with him and went away, and I sit
here thinking, thinking I don't know what.




LETTER (by hand), VAN HELSING TO MRS. HARKER


25 September, 6 o'clock

"Dear Madam Mina,

"I have read your husband's so wonderful diary. You may
sleep without doubt. Strange and terrible as it is, it is
true! I will pledge my life on it. It may be worse for others,
but for him and you there is no dread. He is a noble fellow,
and let me tell you from experience of men, that one who
would do as he did in going down that wall and to that room,
aye, and going a second time, is not one to be injured in
permanence by a shock. His brain and his heart are all right,
this I swear, before I have even seen him, so be at rest. I
shall have much to ask him of other things. I am blessed that
today I come to see you, for I have learn all at once so much
that again I am dazzled, dazzled more than ever, and I must
think.

"Yours the most faithful,

"Abraham Van Helsing."


LETTER, MRS. HARKER TO VAN HELSING


25 September, 6:30 P.M.

"My dear Dr. Van Helsing,

"A thousand thanks for your kind letter, which has taken
a great weight off my mind. And yet, if it be true, what
terrible things there are in the world, and what an awful
thing if that man, that monster, be really in London! I fear
to think. I have this moment, whilst writing, had a wire
from Jonathan, saying that he leaves by the 6:25 tonight from
Launceston and will be here at 10:18, so that I shall have no
fear tonight. Will you, therefore, instead of lunching with
us, please come to breakfast at eight o'clock, if this be not
too early for you? You can get away, if you are in a hurry,
by the 10:30 train, which will bring you to Paddington by
2:35. Do not answer this, as I shall take it that, if I do
not hear, you will come to breakfast.

"Believe me,

"Your faithful and grateful friend,

"Mina Harker."





JONATHAN HARKER'S JOURNAL


26 September.--I thought never to write in this diary
again, but the time has come. When I got home last night
Mina had supper ready, and when we had supped she told me of
Van Helsing's visit, and of her having given him the two
diaries copied out, and of how anxious she has been about me.
She showed me in the doctor's letter that all I wrote down
was true. It seems to have made a new man of me. It was the
doubt as to the reality of the whole thing that knocked me
over. I felt impotent, and in the dark, and distrustful. But,
now that I know, I am not afraid, even of the Count. He has
succeeded after all, then, in his design in getting to Lond-
on, and it was he I saw. He has got younger, and how? Van
Helsing is the man to unmask him and hunt him out, if he is
anything like what Mina says. We sat late, and talked it
over. Mina is dressing, and I shall call at the hotel in a
few minutes and bring him over.


He was, I think, surprised to see me. When I came into
the room whee he was, and introduced myself, he took me by
the shoulder, and turned my face round to the light, and
said, after a sharp scrutiny,

"But Madam Mina told me you were ill, that you had had
a shock."

It was so funny to hear my wife called `Madam Mina' by
this kindly, strong-faced old man. I smiled, and said, "I
was ill, I have had a shock, but you have cured me already."

"And how?"

"By your letter to Mina last night. I was in doubt, and
then everything took a hue of unreality, and I did not know
what to trust, even the evidence of my own senses. Not know-
ing what to trust, I did not know what to do, and so had only
to keep on working in what had hitherto been the groove of
my life. The groove ceased to avail me, and I mistrusted
myself. Doctor, you don't know what it is to doubt everything,
even yourself. No, you don't, you couldn't with eyebrows
like yours."

He seemed pleased, and laughed as he said, "So! You are
a physiognomist. I learn more here with each hour. I am with
so much pleasure coming to you to breakfast, and, oh, sir,
you will pardon praise from an old man, but you are blessed
in your wife."

I would listen to him go on praising Mina for a day, so
I simply nodded and stood silent.

"She is one of God's women, fashioned by His own hand to
show us men and other women that there is a heaven where we
can enter, and that its light can be here on earth. So true,
so sweet, so noble, so little an egoist, and that, let me
tell you, is much in this age, so sceptical and selfish. And
you, sir. . . I have read all the letters to poor Miss Lucy,
and some of them speak of you, so I know you since some days
from the knowing of others, but I have seen your true self
since last night. You will give me your hand, will you not?
And let us be friends for all our lives."

We shook hands, and he was so earnest and so kind that
it made me quite choky.

"and now," he said, "may I ask you for some more help?
I have a great task to do, and at the beginning it is to
know. You can help me here. Can you tell me what went be-
fore your going to Transylvania? Later on I may ask more
help, and of a different kind, but at first this will do."

"Look here, Sir," I said, "does what you have to do
concern the Count?"

"It does," he said solemnly."

"Then I am with you heart and soul. As you go by the
10:30 train, you will not have time to read them, but I
shall get the bundle of papers. You can take them with you
and read them in the train."

After breakfast I saw him to the station. When we were
parting he said, "Perhaps you will come to town if I send
for you, and take Madam Mina too."

"We shall both come when you will," I said.

I had got him the morning papers and the London papers
of the previous night, and while we were talking at the
carriage window, waiting for the train to start, he was turn-
ing them over. His eyes suddenly seemed to catch something
in one of them, "The Westminster Gazette", I knew it by the
color, and he grew quite white. He read something intently,
groaning to himself, "Mein Gott! Mein Gott! So soon! So
soon!" I do not think he remembered me at the moment. Just
then the whistle blew, and the train moved off. This recalled
him to himself, and he leaned out of the window and waved
his hand, calling out, "Love to Madam Mina. I shall write so
soon as ever I can."




DR. SEWARD'S DIARY


26 September.--Truly there is no such thing as finality.
Not a week since I said "Finis," and yet here I am starting
fresh again, or rather going on with the record. Until this
afternoon I had no cause to think of what is done. Renfield
had become, to all intents, as sane as he ever was. He was
already well ahead with his fly business, and he had just
started in the spider line also, so he had not been of any
trouble to me. I had a letter from Arthur, written on Sun-
day, and from it I gather that he is bearing up wonderfully
well. Quincey Morris is with him, and that is much of a
help, for he himself is a bubbling well of good spirits.
Quincey wrote me a line too, and from him I hear that Arthur
is beginning to recover something of his old buoyancy, so as
to them all my mind is at rest. As for myself, I was sett-
ling down to my work with the enthusiasm which I used to
have for it, so that I might fairly have said that the wound
which poor Lucy left on me was becoming cicatrised.

Everything is, however, now reopened, and what is to be
the end God only knows. I have an idea that Van Helsing
thinks he knows, too, but he will only let out enough at a
time to whet curiosity. He went to Exeter yesterday, and
stayed there all night. Today he came back, and almost
bounded into the room at about half-past five o'clock, and
thrust last night's "Westminster Gazette" into my hand.

"What do you think of that?" he asked as he stood back
and folded his arms.

I looked over the paper, for I really did not know what
he meant, but he took it from me and pointed out a paragraph
about children being decoyed away at Hampstead. It did not
convey much to me, until I reached a passage where it des-
cribed small puncture wounds on their throats.  An idea struck
me, and I looked up.

"Well?" he said.

"It is like poor Lucy's."

"And what do you make of it?"

"Simply that there is some cause in common. Whatever
it was that injured her has injured them." I did not quite
understand his answer.

"That is true indirectly, but not directly."

"How do you mean, Professor?" I asked. I was a little
inclined to take his seriousness lightly, for, after all,
four days of rest and freedom from burning, harrowing, anx-
iety does help to restore one's spirits, but when I saw his
face, it sobered me. Never, even in the midst of our des-
pair about poor Lucy, had he looked more stern.

"Tell me!" I said. "I can hazard no opinion. I do not
know what to think, and I have no data on which to found a
conjecture."

"Do you mean to tell me, friend John, that you have no
suspicion as to what poor Lucy died of, not after all the
hints given, not only by events, but by me?"

"Of nervous prostration following a great loss or waste
of blood."

"And how was the blood lost or wasted?" I shook my head.

He stepped over and sat down beside me, and went on, "You
are a clever man, friend John. You reason well, and your wit
is bold, but you are too prejudiced. You do not let your eyes
see nor your ears hear, and that which is outside your daily
life is not of account to you. Do you not think that there
are things which you cannot understand, and yet which are, that
some people see things that others cannot? But there are
things old and new which must not be contemplated by men's
eyes, because they know, or think they know, some things which
other men have told them. Ah, it is the fault of our science
that it wants to explain all, and if it explain not, then it
says there is nothing to explain. But yet we see around us
every day the growth of new beliefs, which think themselves
new, and which are yet but the old, which pretend to be young,
like the fine ladies at the opera. I suppose now you do not
believe in corporeal transference. No? Nor in materialization.
No? Nor in astral bodies. No? Nor in the reading of thought.
No? Nor in hypnotism. . ."

"Yes," I said. "Charcot has proved that pretty well."

He smiled as he went on, "Then you are satisfied as to
it. Yes? And of course then you understand how it act, and
can follow the mind of the great Charcot, alas that he is no
more, into the very soul of the patient that he influence. No?
Then, friend John, am I to take it that you simply accept fact,
and are satisfied to let from premise to conclusion be a
blank? No? Then tell me, for I am a student of the brain,
how you accept hypnotism and reject the thought reading. Let
me tell you, my friend, that there are things done today in
electrical science which would have been deemed unholy by the
very man who discovered electricity, who would themselves not
so long before been burned as wizards. There are always mys-
teries in life. Why was it that Methuselah lived nine hundred
years, and `Old Parr'one hundred and sixty-nine, and yet that
poor Lucy, with four men's blood in her poor veins, could not
live even one day? For, had she live one more day, we could
save her. Do you know all the mystery of life and death? Do
you know the altogether of comparative anatomy and can say
wherefore the qualities of brutes are in some men, and not
in others? Can you tell me why, when other spiders die small
and soon, that one great spider lived for centuries in the
tower of the old Spanish church and grew and grew, till, on
descending, he could drink the oil of all the church lamps?
Can you tell me why in the Pampas, ay and elsewhere, there are
bats that come out at night and open the veins of cattle and
horses and suck dry their veins, how in some islands of the
Western seas there are bats which hang on the trees all day,
and those who have seen describe as like giant nuts or pods,
and that when the sailors sleep on the deck, because that it
is hot, flit down on them and then, and then in the morning
are found dead men, white as even Miss Lucy was?"

"Good God, Professor!" I said, starting up. "Do you
mean to tell me that Lucy was bitten by such a bat, and that
such a thing is here in London in the nineteenth century?"

He waved his hand for silence, and went on, "Can you tell
me why the tortoise lives more long than generations of men,
why the elephant goes on and on till he have sees dynasties,
and why the parrot never die only of bite of cat of dog or
other complaint? Can you tell me why men believe in all ages
and places that there are men and women who cannot die? We
all know, because science has vouched for the fact, that there
have been toads shut up in rocks for thousands of years, shut
in one so small hole that only hold him since the youth of
the world. Can you tell me how the Indian fakir can make him-
self to die and have been buried, and his grave sealed and
corn sowed on it, and the corn reaped and be cut and sown and
reaped and cut again, and then men come and take away the un-
broken seal and that there lie the Indian fakir, not dead,
but that rise up and walk amongst them as before?"

Here I interrupted him. I was getting bewildered. He
so crowded on my mind his list of nature's eccentricities and
possible impossibilities that my imagination was getting
fired. I had a dim idea that he was teaching me some lesson,
as long ago he used to do in his study at Amsterdam. But he
used them to tell me the thing, so that I could have the ob-
ject of thought in mind all the time. But now I was without
his help, yet I wanted to follow him, so I said,

"Professor, let me be your pet student again. Tell me
the thesis, so that I may apply your knowledge as you go on.
At present I am going in my mind from point to point as a
madman, and not a sane one, follows an idea. I feel like a
novice lumbering through a bog in a midst, jumping from one
tussock to another in the mere blind effort to move on with-
out knowing where I am going."

"That is a good image," he said. "Well, I shall tell
you. My thesis is this, I want you to believe."

"To believe what?"

"To believe in things that you cannot. Let me illustrate.
I heard once of an American who so defined faith, `that fac-
ulty which enables us to believe things which we know to be
untrue.' For one, I follow that man. He meant that we shall
have an open mind, and not let a little bit of truth check the
rush of the big truth, like a small rock does a railway truck.
We get the small truth first. Good! We keep him, and we
value him, but all the same we must not let him think himself
all the truth in the universe."

"Then you want me not to let some previous conviction
inure the receptivity of my mind with regard to some strange
matter. Do I read your lesson aright?"

"Ah, you are my favorite pupil still. It is worth to
teach you. Now that you are willing to understand, you have
taken the first step to understand. You think then that
those so small holes in the children's throats were made by
the same that made the holes in Miss Lucy?"

"I suppose so."

He stood up and said solemnly, "Then you are wrong. Oh,
would it were so! But alas! No. It is worse, far, far worse."

"In God's name, Professor Van Helsing, what do you mean?"
I cried.

He threw himself with a despairing gesture into a chair,
and placed his elbows on the table, covering his face with
his hands as he spoke.

"They were made by Miss Lucy!"




CHAPTER 15


DR. SEWARD'S DIARY-cont.


For a while sheer anger mastered me. It was as if he
had during her life struck Lucy on the face. I smote the
table hard and rose up as I said to him, "Dr. Van Helsing,
are you mad?"

He raised his head and looked at me, and somehow the
tenderness of his face calmed me at once. "Would I were!" he
said. "Madness were easy to bear compared with truth like
this. Oh, my friend, whey, think you, did I go so far round,
why take so long to tell so simple a thing? Was it because I
hate you and have hated you all my life? Was it because I
wished to give you pain? Was it that I wanted, no so late,
revenge for that time when you saved my life, and from a
fearful death? Ah no!"

"Forgive me," said I.

He went on, "My friend, it was because I wished to be
gentle in the breaking to you, for I know you have loved
that so sweet lady. But even yet I do not expect you to
believe. It is so hard to accept at once any abstract truth,
that we may doubt such to be possible when we have always
believed the `no' of it. It is more hard still to accept so
sad a concrete truth, and of such a one as Miss Lucy. Tonight
I go to prove it. Dare you come with me?"

This staggered me. A man does not like to prove such a
truth, Byron excepted from the catagory, jealousy.


"And prove the very truth he most abhorred."


He saw my hesitation, and spoke, "The logic is simple,
no madman's logic this time, jumping from tussock to tussock
in a misty bog. If it not be true, then proof will be relief.
At worst it will not harm. If it be true! Ah, there is the
dread. Yet every dread should help my cause, for in it is
some need of belief. Come, I tell you what I propose. First,
that we go off now and see that child in the hospital. Dr.
Vincent, of the North Hospital, where the papers say the
child is, is a friend of mine, and I think of yours since
you were in class at Amsterdam. He will let two scientists
see his case, if he will not let two friends. We shall tell
him nothing, but only that we wish to learn. And then. . ."

"And then?"

He took a key from his pocket and held it up. "And then
we spend the night, you and I, in the churchyard where Lucy
lies. This is the key that lock the tomb. I had it from the
coffin man to give to Arthur."

My heart sank within me, for I felt that there was some
fearful ordeal before us. I could do nothing, however, so I
plucked up what heart I could and said that we had better
hasten, as the afternoon was passing.

We found the child awake. It had had a sleep and taken
some food, and altogether was going on well. Dr, Vincent
took the bandage from its throat, and showed us the punct-
ures. There was no mistaking the similarity to those which
had been on Lucy's throat. They were smaller, and the edges
looked fresher, that was all. We asked Vincent to what he
attributed them, and he replied that it must have been a
bite of some animal, perhaps a rat, but for his own part, he
was inclined to think it was one of the bats which are so
numerous on the northern heights of London. "Out of so many
harmless ones," he said, "there may be some wild specimen
from the South of a more malignant species. Some sailor may
have brought one home, and it managed to escape, or even from
the Zoological Gardens a young one may have got loose, or one
be bred there from a vampire. These things do occur, you,
know. Only ten days ago a wolf got out, and was, I believe,
traced up in this direction. For a week after, the children
were playing nothing but Red Riding Hood on the Heath and in
every alley in the place until this `bloofer lady' scare
came along, since then it has been quite a gala time with
them. Even this poor little mite, when he woke up today,
asked the nurse if he might go away. When she asked him why
he wanted to go, he said he wanted to play with the `bloofer
lady'."

"I hope," said Van Helsing, "that when you are sending
the child home you will caution its parents to keep strict
watch over it. These fancies to stray are most dangerous,
and if the child were to remain out another night, it would
probably be fatal. But in any case I suppose you will not
let it away for some days?"

"Certainly not, not for a week at least, longer if the
wound is not healed."

Our visit to the hospital took more time than we had
reckoned on, and the sun had dipped before we came out. When
Van Helsing saw how dark it was, he said,

"There is not hurry. It is more late than I thought.
Come, let us seek somewhere that we may eat, and then we
shall go on our way."

We dined at `Jack Straw's Castle' along with a little
crowd of bicyclists and others who were genially noisy.  About
ten o'clock we started from the inn. It was then very dark,
and the scattered lamps made the darkness greater when we
were once outside their individual radius. The Professor had
evidently noted the road we were to go, for he went on un-
hesitatingly, but, as for me, I was in quite a mixup as to
locality. As we went further, we met fewer and fewer people,
till at last we were somewhat surprised when we met even the
patrol of horse police going their usual suburban round. At
last we reached the wall of the churchyard, which we climbed
over. With some little difficulty, for it was very dark, and
the whole place seemed so strange to us, we found the West-
enra tomb. The Professor took the key, opened the creaky
door, and standing back, politely, but quite unconsciously,
motioned me to precede him. There was a delicious irony in
the offer, in the courtliness of giving preference on such a
ghastly occasion. My companion followed me quickly, and
cautiously drew the door to, after carefully ascertaining
that the lock was a falling, and not a spring one. In the
latter case we should have been in a bad plight. Then he
fumbled in his bag, and taking out a matchbox and a piece of
candle, proceeded to make a light. The tomb in the daytime,
and when wreathed with fresh flowers, had looked grim and
gruesome enough, but now, some days afterwards, when the
flowers hung lank and dead, their whites turning to rust and
their greens to browns, when the spider and the beetle had
resumed their accustomed dominance, when the time-discolored
stone, and dust-encrusted mortar, and rusty, dank iron, and
tarnished brass, and clouded silver-plating gave back the
feeble glimmer of a candle, the effect was more miserable
and sordid than could have been imagined. It conveyed irr-
esistibly the idea that life, animal life, was not the only
thing which could pass away.

Van Helsing went about his work systematically. Hold-
ing his candle so that he could read the coffin plates, and
so holding it that the sperm dropped in white patches which
congealed as they touched the metal, he made assurance of
Lucy's coffin. Another search in his bag, and he took out a
turnscrew.

"What are you going to do?" I asked.

"To open the coffin. You shall yet be convinced."

Straightway he began taking out the screws, and finally
lifted off the lid, showing the casing of lead beneath. The
sight was almost too much for me. It seemed to be as much an
affront to the dead as it would have been to have stripped
off her clothing in her sleep whilst living. I actually took
hold of his hand to stop him.

He only said, "You shall see, "and again fumbling in his
bag took out a tiny fret saw. Striking the turnscrew through
the lead with a swift downward stab, which made me wince, he
made a small hole, which was, however, big enough to admit
the point of the saw. I had expected a rush of gas from the
week-old corpse. We doctors, who have had to study our dan-
gers, have to become accustomed to such things, and I drew
back towards the door. But the Professor never stopped for
a moment. He sawed down a couple of feet along one side of
the lead coffin, and then across, and down the other side.
Taking the edge of the loose flange, he bent it back towards
the foot of the coffin, and holding up the candle into the
aperture, motioned to me to look.

I drew near and looked. The coffin was empty. It was
certainly a surprise to me, and gave me a considerable shock,
but Van Helsing was unmoved. He was now more sure than ever
of his ground, and so emboldened to proceed in his task."Are
you satisfied now, friend John?" he asked.

I felt all the dogged argumentativeness of my nature
awake within me as I answered him, "I am satisfied that
Lucy's body is not in that coffin, but that only proves one
thing."

"And what is that, friend John?"

"That it is not there."

"That is good logic," he said, "so far as it goes. But
how do you, how can you, account for it not being there?"

"Perhaps a body-snatcher," I suggested. "Some of the
undertaker's people may have stolen it." I felt that I was
speaking folly, and yet it was the only real cause which I
could suggest.

The Professor sighed. "Ah well!" he said," we must have
more proof. Come with me."

He put on the coffin lid again, gathered up all his
things and placed them in the bag, blew out the light, and
placed the candle also in the bag. We opened the door, and
went out. Behind us he closed the door and locked it. He
handed me the key, saying, "Will you keep it? You had better
be assured."

I laughed, it was not a very cheerful laugh, I am bound
to say, as I motioned him to keep it. "A key is nothing," I
said, "thee are many duplicates, and anyhow it is not diffi-
cult to pick a lock of this kind."

He said nothing, but put the key in his pocket. Then
he told me to watch at one side of the churchyard whilst he
would watch at the other.

I took up my place behind a yew tree, and I saw his
dark figure move until the intervening headstones and trees
hid it from my sight.

It was a lonely vigil. Just after I had taken my place I
heard a distant clock strike twelve, and in time came one and
two. I was chilled and unnerved, and angry with the Professor
for taking me on such an errand and with myself for coming.
I was too cold and too sleepy to be keenly observant, and not
sleepy enough to betray my trust, so altogether I had a
dreary, miserable time.

Suddenly, as I turned round, I thought I saw something
like a white streak, moving between two dark yew trees at the
side of the churchyard farthest from the tomb. At the same
time a dark mass moved from the Professor's side of the
ground, and hurriedly went towards it. Then I too moved, but
I had to go round headstones and railed-off tombs, and I
stumbled over graves. The sky was overcast, and somewhere far
off an early cock crew. A little ways off, beyond a line of
scattered juniper trees, which marked the pathway to the
church, a white dim figure flitted in the direction of the
tomb. The tomb itself was hidden by trees, and I could not
see where the figure had disappeared. I heard the rustle of
actual movement where I had first seen the white figure, and
coming over, found the Professor holding in his arms a tiny
child. When he saw me he held it out to me, and said, "Are
you satisfied now?"

"No," I said, in a way that I felt was aggressive.

"Do you not see the child?"

"Yes, it is a child, but who brought it here? And is it
wounded?"

"We shall see," said the Professor, and with one impulse
we took our way out of the churchyard, he carrying the sleep-
ing child.

When we had got some little distance away, we went into
a clump of trees, and struck a match, and looked at the
child's throat. It was without a scratch or scar of any kind.

"Was I right?" I asked triumphantly.

"We were just in time," said the Professor thankfully.

We had now to decide what we were to do with the child,
and so consulted about it. If we were to take it to a police
station we should have to give some account of our movements
during the night. At least, we should have had to make some
statement as to how we had come to find the child. So finally
we decided that we would take it to the Heath, and when we
heard a policeman coming, would leave it where he could not
fail to find it. We would then seek our way home as quickly
as we could. All fell out well. At the edge of Hampstead
Heath we heard a policeman's heavy tramp, and laying the
child on the pathway, we waited and watched until he saw it
as he flashed his lantern to and fro. We heard his exclam-
ation of astonishment, and then we went away silently. By
good chance we got a cab near the `Spainiards,' and drove to
town.

I cannot sleep, so I make this entry. But I must try to
get a few hours' sleep, as Van Helsing is to call for me at
noon. He insists that I go with him on another expedition.


27 September.--It was two o'clock before we found a
suitable opportunity for our attempt. The funeral held at
noon was all completed, and the last stragglers of the mour-
ners had taken themselves lazily away, when, looking care-
fully from behind a clump of alder trees, we saw the sexton
lock the gate after him. We knew that we were safe till
morning did we desire it, but the Professor told me that we
should not want more than an hour at most. Again I felt that
horrid sense of the reality of things, in which any effort of
imagination seemed out of place, and I realized distinctly
the perils of the law which we were incurring in our unhal-
lowed work. Besides, I felt it was all so useless. Outrag-
eous as it was to open a leaden coffin, to see if a woman
dead nearly a week were really dead, it now seemed the height
of folly to open the tomb again, when we knew, from the evi-
dence of our own eyesight, that the coffin was empty. I
shrugged my shoulders, however, and rested silent, for Van
Helsing had a way of going on his own road, no matter who
remonstrated. He took the key, opened the vault, and again
courteously motioned me to precede. The place was not so
gruesome as last night, but oh, how unutterably mean looking
when the sunshine streamed in. Van Helsing walked over to
Lucy's coffin, and I followed. He bent over and again forced
back the leaden flange, and a shock of surprise and dismay
shot through me.

There lay Lucy, seemingly just as we had seen her the
night before her funeral. She was, if possible, more radi-
antly beautiful than ever, and I could not believe that she
was dead. The lips were red, nay redder than before, and
on the cheeks was a delicate bloom.

"Is this a juggle?" I said to him.

"Are you convinced now?" said the Professor, in response,
and as he spoke he put over his hand, and in a way that made
me shudder, pulled back the dead lips and showed the white
teeth. "See," he went on, "they are even sharper than before.
With this and this," and he touched one of the canine teeth
and that below it, "the little children can be bitten. Are
you of belief now, friend John?"

Once more argumentative hostility woke within me. I
could not accept such an overwhelming idea as he suggested.
So, with an attempt to argue of which I was even at the mom-
ent ashamed, I said, "She may have been placed here since
last night."

"Indeed? That is so, and by whom?"

"I do not know. Someone has done it."

"And yet she has been dead one week. Most peoples in
that time would not look so."

I had no answer for this, so was silent. Van Helsing
did not seem to notice my silence. At any rate, he showed
neither chagrin nor triumph. He was looking intently at the
face of the dead woman, raising the eyelids and looking at
the eyes, and once more opening the lips and examining the
teeth. Then he turned to me and said,

"Here, there is one thing which is different from all
recorded. Here is some dual life that is not as the common.
She was bitten by the vampire when she was in a trance,
sleep-walking, oh, you start. You do not know that, friend
John, but you shall know it later, and in trance could he
best come to take more blood. In trance she dies, and in
trance she is Un-Dead, too. So it is that she differ from
all other. Usually when the Un-Dead sleep at home," as he
spoke he made a comprehensive sweep of his arm to designate
what to a vampire was `home', "their face show what they are,
but this so sweet that was when she not Un-Dead she go back
to the nothings of the common dead. There is no malign there,
see, and so it make hard that I must kill her in her sleep."

This turned my blood cold, and it began to dawn upon me
that I was accepting Van Helsing's theories. But if she were
really dead, what was there of terror in the idea of killing
her?

He looked up at me, and evidently saw the change in my
face, for he said almost joyously, "Ah, you believe now?"

I answered, "Do not press me too hard all at once. I am
willing to accept. How will you do this bloody work?"

"I shall cut off her head and fill her mouth with gar-
lic, and I shall drive a stake through her body."

It made me shudder to think of so mutilating the body
of the woman whom I had loved. And yet the feeling was not
so strong as I had expected. I was, in fact, beginning to
shudder at the presence of this being, this Un-Dead, as Van
Helsing called it, and to loathe it. Is it possible that
love is all subjective, or all objective?

I waited a considerable time for Van Helsing to begin,
but he stood as if wrapped in thought. Presently he closed
the catch of his bag with a snap, and said,

"I have been thinking, and have made up my mind as to
what is best. If I did simply follow my inclining I would
do now, at this moment, what is to be done. But there are
other things to follow, and things that are thousand times
more difficult in that them we do not know. This is simple.
She have yet no life taken, though that is of time, and to
act now would be to take danger from her forever. But then
we may have to want Arthur, and how shall we tell him of
this? If you, who saw the wounds on Lucy's throat, and saw
the wounds so similar on the child's at the hospital, if you,
who saw the coffin empty last night and full today with a
woman who have not change only to be more rose and more beau-
tiful in a whole week, after she die, if you know of this and
know of the white figure last night that brought the child
to the churchyard, and yet of your own senses you did not
believe, how then, can I expect Arthur, who know none of
those things, to believe?

"He doubted me when I took him from her kiss when she
was dying. I know he has forgiven me because in some mis-
taken idea I have done things that prevent him say goodbye
as he ought, and he may think that in some more mistaken
idea this woman was buried alive, and that in most mistake
of all we have killed her. He will then argue back that it
is we, mistaken ones, that have killed her by our ideas, and
so he will be much unhappy always. Yet he never can be sure,
and that is the worst of all. And he will sometimes think
that she he loved was buried alive, and that will paint his
dreams with horrors of what she must have suffered, and again,
he will think that we may be right, and that his so beloved
was, after all, an Un-Dead. No! I told him once, and since
then I learn much. Now, since I know it is all true, a hun-
dred thousand times more do I know that he must pass through
the bitter waters to reach the sweet. He, poor fellow, must
have one hour that will make the very face of heaven grow
black to him, then we can act for good all round and send him
peace. My mind is made up. Let us go. You return home for
tonight to your asylum, and see that all be well. As for me,
I shall spend the night here in this churchyard in my own
way. Tomorrow night you will come to me to the Berkeley
Hotel at ten of the clock. I shall send for Arthur to come
too, and also that so fine young man of America that gave his
blood. Later we shall all have work to do. I come with you
so far as Piccadilly and there dine, for I must be back here
before the sun set."

So we locked the tomb and came away, and got over the
wall of the churchyard, which was not much of a task, and
drove back to Piccadilly.




NOTE LEFT BY VAN HELSING IN HIS PORTMANTEAU, BERKELEY HOTEL
DIRECTED TO JOHN SEWARD, M. D.
(Not Delivered)


27 September

"Friend John,

"I write this in case anything should happen. I go alone
to watch in that churchyard. It pleases me that the Un-Dead,
Miss Lucy, shall not leave tonight, that so on the morrow
night she may be more eager. Therefore I shall fix some
things she like not, garlic and a crucifix, and so seal up
the door of the tomb. She is young as Un-Dead, and will heed.
Moreover, these are only to prevent her coming out. They may
not prevail on her wanting to get in, for then the Un-Dead
is desperate, and must find the line of least resistance,
whatsoever it may be. I shall be at hand all the night from
sunset till after sunrise, and if there be aught that may be
learned I shall learn it. For Miss Lucy or from her, I have
no fear, but that other to whom is there that she is Un-Dead,
he have not the power to seek her tomb and find shelter. He
is cunning, as I know from Mr. Jonathan and from the way
that all along he have fooled us when he played with us for
Miss Lucy's life, and we lost, and in many ways the Un-Dead
are strong. He have always the strength in his hand of
twenty men, even we four who gave our strength to Miss Lucy
it also is all to him. Besides, he can summon his wolf and
I know not what. So if it be that he came thither on this
night he shall find me. But none other shall, until it be
too late. But it may be that he will not attempt the place.
There is no reason why he should. His hunting ground is
more full of game than the churchyard where the Un-Dead wo-
man sleeps, and the one old man watch.

"Therefore I write this in case. . .Take the papers
that are with this, the diaries of Harker and the rest, and
read them, and then find this great Un-Dead, and cut off
his head and burn his heart or drive a stake through it, so
that the world may rest from him.

"If it be so, farewell.

"VAN HELSING."




DR. SEWARD'S DIARY


28 September.--It is wonderful what a good night's
sleep will do for one. Yesterday I was almost willing to
accept Van Helsing's monstrous ideas, but now they seem to
start out lurid before me as outrages on common sense. I have
no doubt that he believes it all. I wonder if his mind can
have become in any way unhinged. Surely there must be some
rational explanation of all these mysterious things. Is it
possible that the Professor can have done it himself? He is
so abnormally clever that if he went off his head he would
carry out his intent with regard to some fixed idea in a won-
derful way. I am loathe to think it, and indeed it would be
almost as great a marvel as the other to find that Van Hel-
sing was mad, but anyhow I shall watch him carefully. I may
get some light on the mystery.


29 September.--Last night, at a little before ten
o'clock, Arthur and Quincey came into Van Helsing's room. He
told us all what he wanted us to do, but especially address-
ing himself to Arthur, as if all our wills were centered in
his. He began by saying that he hoped we would all come with
him too, "for," he said, "there is a grave duty to be done
there. You were doubtless surprised at my letter?" This
query was directly addressed to Lord Godalming.

"I was. It rather upset me for a bit. There has been so
much trouble around my house of late that I could do without
any more. I have been curious, too, as to what you mean.

"Quincey and I talked it over, but the more we talked,
the more puzzled we got, till now I can say for myself that
I'm about up a tree as to any meaning about anything."

"Me too," said Quincey Morris laconically.

"Oh," said the Professor, "then you are nearer the be-
ginning, both of you, than friend John here, who has to go
a long way back before he can even get so far as to begin."

It was evident that he recognized my return to my old
doubting frame of mind without my saying a word. Then, turn-
ing to the other two, he said with intense gravity,

"I want your permission to do what I think good this
night. It is, I know, much to ask, and when you know what
it is I propose to do you will know, and only then how much.
Therefore may I ask that you promise me in the dark, so that
afterwards, though you may be angry with me for a time, I
must not disguise from myself the possibility that such may
be, you shall not blame yourselves for anything."

"That's frank anyhow," broke in Quincey. "I'll answer
for the Professor. I don't quite see his drift, but I swear
he's honest, and that's good enough for me."

"I thank you, Sir," said Van Helsing proudly. "I have
done myself the honor of counting you one trusting friend,
and such endorsement is dear to me." He held out a hand,
which Quincey took.

Then Arthur spoke out, "Dr. Van Helsing, I don't quite
like to `buy a pig in a poke', as they say in Scotland, and
if it be anything in which my honour as a gentleman or my
faith as a Christian is concerned, I cannot make such a pro-
mise. If you can assure me that what you intend does not
violate either of these two, then I give my consent at once,
though for the life of me, I cannot understand what you are
driving at."

"I accept your limitation," said Van Helsing, "and all
I ask of you is that if you feel it necessary to condemn
any act of mine, you will first consider it well and be
satisfied that it does not violate your reservations."

"Agreed!" said Arthur. "That is only fair. And now
that the pourparlers are over, may I ask what it is we are
to do?"

"I want you to come with me, and to come in secret, to
the churchyard at Kingstead."

Arthur's face fell as he said in an amazed sort of way,

"Where poor Lucy is buried?"

The Professor bowed.

Arthur went on, "And when there?"

"To enter the tomb!"

Arthur stood up. "Professor, are you in earnest, or is
it some monstrous joke? Pardon me, I see that you are in
earnest." He sat down again, but I could see that he sat
firmly and proudly, as one who is on his dignity. There was
silence until he asked again, "And when in the tomb?"

"To open the coffin."

"This is too much!" he said, angrily rising again. "I
am willing to be patient in all things that are reasonable,
but in this, this desecration of the grave, of one who. . ."
He fairly choked with indignation.

The Professor looked pityingly at him."If I could spare
you one pang, my poor friend," he said, "God knows I would.
But this night our feet must tread in thorny paths, or later,
and for ever, the feet you love must walk in paths of
flame!"

Arthur looked up with set white face and said, "Take
care, sir, take care!"

"Would it not be well to hear what I have to say?" said
Van Helsing. "And then you will at least know the limit of
my purpose. Shall I go on?"

"That's fair enough," broke in Morris.

After a pause Van Helsing went on, evidently with an
effort, "Miss Lucy is dead, is it not so? Yes! Then there
can be no wrong to her. But if she be not dead. . ."

Arthur jumped to his feet, "Good God!" he cried. "What
do you mean? Has there been any mistake, has she been buried
alive?" He groaned in anguish that not even hope could soften.

"I did not say she was alive, my child. I did not think
it. I go no further than to say that she might be Un-Dead."

"Un-Dead! Not alive! What do you mean? Is this all a
nightmare, or what is it?"

"There are mysteries which men can only guess at, which
age by age they may solve only in part. Believe me, we are
now on the verge of one. But I have not done. May I cut off
the head of dead Miss Lucy?"

"Heavens and earth, no!" cried Arthur in a storm of
passion. "Not for the wide world will I consent to any
mutilation of her dead body. Dr. Van Helsing, you try me
too far. What have I done to you that you should torture
me so? What did that poor, sweet girl do that you should
want to cast such dishonor on her grave? Are you mad, that
you speak of such things, or am I mad to listen to them?
Don't dare think more of such a desecration. I shall not
give my consent to anything you do. I have a duty to do in
protecting her grave from outrage, and by God, I shall do it!"

Van Helsing rose up from where he had all the time been
seated, and said, gravely and sternly, "My Lord Godalming, I
too, have a duty to do, a duty to others, a duty to you, a
duty to the dead, and by God, I shall do it! All I ask you
now is that you come with me, that you look and listen, and
if when later I make the same request you do not be more
eager for its fulfillment even than I am, then, I shall do my
duty, whatever it may seem to me. And then, to follow your
Lordship's wishes I shall hold myself at your disposal to
render an account to you, when and where you will." His voice
broke a little, and he went on with a voice full of pity.

"But I beseech you, do not go forth in anger with me. In
a long life of acts which were often not pleasant to do, and
which sometimes did wring my heart, I have never had so heavy
a task as now. Believe me that if the time comes for you to
change your mind towards me, one look from you will wipe away
all this so sad hour, for I would do what a man can to save
you from sorrow. Just think. For why should I give myself
so much labor and so much of sorrow? I have come here from
my own land to do what I can of good, at the first to please
my friend John, and then to help a sweet young lady, whom too,
I come to love. For her, I am ashamed to say so much, but I
say it in kindness, I gave what you gave, the blood of my
veins. I gave it, I who was not, like you, her lover, but
only her physician and her friend. I gave her my nights and
days, before death, after death, and if my death can do her
good even now, when she is the dead Un-Dead, she shall have
it freely." He said this with a very grave, sweet pride, and
Arthur was much affected by it.

He took the old man's hand and said in a broken voice,
"Oh, it is hard to think of it, and I cannot understand, but
at least I shall go with you and wait."





CHAPTER 16


DR SEWARD'S DIARY-cont.


It was just a quarter before twelve o'clock when we got
into the churchyard over the low wall. The night was dark
with occasional gleams of moonlight between the dents of the
heavy clouds that scudded across the sky. We all kept some-
how close together, with Van Helsing slightly in front as he
led the way. When we had come close to the tomb I looked well
at Arthur, for I feared the proximity to a place laden with
so sorrowful a memory would upset him, but he bore himself
well. I took it that the very mystery of the proceeding was
in some way a counteractant to his grief. The Professor un-
locked the door, and seeing a natural hesitation amongst us
for various reasons, solved the difficulty by entering first
himself. The rest of us followed, and he closed the door. He
then lit a dark lantern and pointed to a coffin.  Arthur step-
ped forward hesitatingly. Van Helsing said to me, "You were
with me here yesterday. Was the body of Miss Lucy in that
coffin?"

"It was."

The Professor turned to the rest saying, "You hear, and
yet there is no one who does not believe with me.'

He took his screwdriver and again took off the lid of
the coffin. Arthur looked on, very pale but silent. When
the lid was removed he stepped forward. He evidently did not
know that there was a leaden coffin, or at any rate, had not
thought of it. When he saw the rent in the lead, the blood
rushed to his face for an instant, but as quickly fell away
again, so that he remained of a ghastly whiteness. He was
still silent. Van Helsing forced back the leaden flange, and
we all looked in and recoiled.

The coffin was empty!

For several minutes no one spoke a word. The silence
was broken by Quincey Morris, "Professor, I answered for you.
Your word is all I want. I wouldn't ask such a thing ordin-
arily, I wouldn't so dishonor you as to imply a doubt, but
this is a mystery that goes beyond any honor or dishonor. Is
this your doing?"

"I swear to you by all that I hold sacred that I have
not removed or touched her. What happened was this. Two
nights ago my friend Seward and I came here, with good pur-
pose, believe me. I opened that coffin, which was then sealed
up, and we found it as now, empty. We then waited, and saw
something white come through the trees. The next day we came
here in daytime and she lay there. Did she not, friend John?

"Yes."

"That night we were just in time. One more so small
child was missing, and we find it, thank God, unharmed amongst
the graves. Yesterday I came here before sundown, for at sun-
down the Un-Dead can move. I waited here all night till the
sun rose, but I saw nothing. It was most probable that it
was because I had laid over the clamps of those doors garlic,
which the Un-Dead cannot bear, and other things which they
shun. Last night there was no exodus, so tonight before the
sundown I took away my garlic and other things. And so it is
we find this coffin empty. But bear with me. So far there is
much that is strange. Wait you with me outside, unseen and
unheard, and things much stranger are yet to be. So," here he
shut the dark slide of his lantern, "now to the outside." He
opened the door, and we filed out, he coming last and locking
the door behind him.

Oh! But it seemed fresh and pure in the night air after
the terror of that vault. How sweet it was to see the clouds
race by, and the passing gleams of the moonlight between the
scudding clouds crossing and passing, like the gladness and
sorrow of a man's life. How sweet it was to breathe the fresh
air, that had no taint of death and decay. How humanizing to
see the red lighting of the sky beyond the hill, and to hear
far away the muffled roar that marks the life of a great
city. Each in his own way was solemn and overcome. Arthur
was silent, and was, I could see, striving to grasp the pur-
pose and the inner meaning of the mystery. I was myself tol-
erably patient, and half inclined again to throw aside doubt
and to accept Van Helsing's conclusions. Quincey Morris was
phlegmatic in the way of a man who accepts all things, and
accepts them in the spirit of cool bravery, with hazard of
all he has at stake. Not being able to smoke, he cut himself
a good-sized plug of tobacco and began to chew. As to Van
Helsing, he was employed in a definite way. First he took
from his bag a mass of what looked like thin, wafer-like
biscuit, which was carefully rolled up in a white napkin.
Next he took out a double handful of some whitish stuff, like
dough or putty. He crumbled the wafer up fine and worked it
into the mass between his hands. This he then took, and roll-
ing it into thin strips, began to lay them into the crevices
between the door and its setting in the tomb. I was some-
what puzzled at this, and being close, asked him what it was
that he was doing. Arthur and Quincey drew near also, as they
too were curious.

He answered, "I am closing the tomb so that the Un-Dead
may not enter."

"And is that stuff you have there going to do it?"

"It Is."

"What is that which you are using?" This time the ques-
tion was by Arthur. Van Helsing reverently lifted his hat
as he answered.

"The Host. I brought it from Amsterdam. I have an In-
dulgence."

It was an answer that appalled the most sceptical of
us, and we felt individually that in the presence of such
earnest purpose as the Professor's, a purpose which could
thus use the to him most sacred of things, it was impossible
to distrust. In respectful silence we took the places assign-
ed to us close round the tomb, but hidden from the sight of
any one approaching. I pitied the others, especially Arthur.
I had myself been apprenticed by my former visits to this
watching horror, and yet I, who had up to an hour ago repud-
iated the proofs, felt my heart sink within me. Never did
tombs look so ghastly white. Never did cypress, or yew, or
juniper so seem the embodiment of funeral gloom. Never did
tree or grass wave or rustle so ominously. Never did bough
creak so mysteriously, and never did the far-away howling of
dogs send such a woeful presage through the night.

There was a long spell of silence, big, aching, void,
and then from the Professor a keen "S-s-s-s!" He pointed,
and far down the avenue of yews we saw a white figure ad-
vance, a dim white figure, which held something dark at its
breast. The figure stopped, and at the moment a ray of moon-
light fell upon the masses of driving clouds, and showed in
startling prominence a dark-haired woman, dressed in the
cerements of the grave. We could not see the face, for it
was bent down over what we saw to be a fair-haired child.
There was a pause and a sharp little cry, such as a child
gives in sleep, or a dog as it lies before the fire and
dreams. We were starting forward, but the Professor's warn-
ing hand, seen by us as he stood behind a yew tree, kept us
back. And then as we looked the white figure moved forwards
again. It was now near enough for us to see clearly, and the
moonlight still held. My own heart grew cold as ice, and I
could hear the gasp of Arthur, as we recognized the features
of Lucy Westenra. Lucy Westenra, but yet how changed. The
sweetness was turned to adamantine, heartless cruelty, and
the purity to voluptuous wantonness.

Van Helsing stepped out, and obedient to his gesture, we
all advanced too. The four of us ranged in a line before the
door of the tomb. Van Helsing raised his lantern and drew
the slide. By the concentrated light that fell on Lucy's
face we could see that the lips were crimson with fresh
blood, and that the stream had trickled over her chin and
stained the purity of her lawn death robe.

We shuddered with horror. I could see by the tremulous
light that even Van Helsing's iron nerve had failed. Arthur
was next to me, and if I had not seized his arm and held him
up, he would have fallen.

When Lucy, I call the thing that was before us Lucy be-
cause it bore her shape, saw us she drew back with an angry
snarl, such as a cat gives when taken unawares, then her eyes
ranged over us. Lucy's eyes in form and color, but Lucy's
eyes unclean and full of hell fire, instead of the pure,
gentle orbs we knew. At that moment the remnant of my love
passed into hate and loathing. Had she then to be killed, I
could have done it with savage delight. As she looked, her
eyes blazed with unholy light, and the face became wreathed
with a voluptuous smile. Oh, God, how it made me shudder to
see it! With a careless motion, she flung to the ground,
callous as a devil, the child that up to now she had clutched
strenuously to her breast, growling over it as a dog growls
over a bone. The child gave a sharp cry, and lay there moan-
ing. There was a cold-bloodedness in the act which wrung a
groan from Arthur. When she advanced to him with outstretched
arms and a wanton smile he fell back and hid his face in his
hands.

She still advanced, however, and with a languorous, vol-
uptuous grace, said, "Come to me, Arthur. Leave these others
and come to me. My arms are hungry for you. Come, and we can
rest together. Come, my husband, come!"

There was something diabolically sweet in her tones,
something of the tinkling of glass when struck, which rang
through the brains even of us who heard the words addressed
to another.

As for Arthur, he seemed under a spell, moving his hands
from his face, he opened wide his arms. She was leaping for
them, when Van Helsing sprang forward and held between them
his little golden crucifix. She recoiled from it, and, with
a suddenly distorted face, full of rage, dashed past him as
if to enter the tomb.

When within a foot or two of the door, however, she stop-
ped, as if arrested by some irresistible force. Then she
turned, and her face was shown in the clear burst of moon-
light and by the lamp, which had now no quiver from Van Hel-
sing's nerves. Never did I see such baffled malice on a face,
and never, I trust, shall such ever be seen again by mortal
eyes. The beautiful color became livid, the eyes seemed to
throw out sparks of hell fire, the brows were wrinkled as
though the folds of flesh were the coils of Medusa's snakes,
and the lovely, blood-stained mouth grew to an open square,
as in the passion masks of the Greeks and Japanese. If ever
a face meant death, if looks could kill, we saw it at that
moment.

And so for full half a minute, which seemed an eternity,
se remained between the lifted crucifix and the sacred clos-
ing of her means of entry.

Van Helsing broke the silence by asking Arthur, "Answer
me, oh my friend! Am I to proceed in my work?"

"Do as you will, friend. Do as you will. There can be
no horror like this ever any more." And he groaned in spirit.

Quincey and I simultaneously moved towards him, and took
his arms. We could hear the click of the closing lantern as
Van Helsing held it down. Coming close to the tomb, he began
to remove from the chinks some of the sacred emblem which he
had placed there. We all looked on with horrified amazement
as we saw, when he stood back, the woman, with a corporeal
body as real at that moment as our own, pass through the
interstice where scarce a knife blade could have gone. We all
felt a glad sense of relief when we saw the Professor calmly
restoring the strings of putty to the edges of the door.

When this was done, he lifted the child and said, "Come
now, my friends. We can do no more till tomorrow. There is
a funeral at noon, so here we shall all come before long
after that. The friends of the dead will all be gone by two,
and when the sexton locks the gate we shall remain. Then
there is more to do, but not like this of tonight. As for
this little one, he is not much harmed, and by tomorrow
night he shall be well. We shall leave him where the police
will find him, as on the other night, and then to home."

Coming close to Arthur, he said, "My friend Arthur, you
have had a sore trial, but after, when you look back, you
will see how it was necessary. You are now in the bitter
waters, my child. By this time tomorrow you will, please
God, have passed them, and have drunk of the sweet waters.
So do not mourn over-much. Till then I shall not ask you to
forgive me."

Arthur and Quincey came home with me, and we tried to
cheer each other on the way. We had left behind the child
in safety, and were tired. So we all slept with more or less
reality of sleep.


29 September, night.--A little before twelve o'clock we
three, Arthur, Quincey Morris, and myself, called for the
Professor. It was odd to notice that by common consent we
had all put on black clothes. Of course, Arthur wore black,
for he was in deep mourning, but the rest of us wore it by
instinct. We got to the graveyard by half-past one, and
strolled about, keeping out of official observation, so that
when the gravediggers had completed their task and the sex-
ton under the belief that every one had gone, had locked the
gate, we had the place all to ourselves. Van Helsing, instead
of his little black bag, had with him a long leather one, some-
thing like a cricketing bag. It was manifestly of fair weight.

When we were alone and had heard the last of the foot-
steps die out up the road, we silently, and as if by ordered
intention, followed the Professor to the tomb. He unlocked
the door, and we entered, closing it behind us. Then he took
from his bag the lantern, which he lit, and also two wax
candles, which, when lighted, he stuck by melting their own
ends, on other coffins, so that they might give light suff-
icient to work by. When he again lifted the lid off Lucy's
coffin we all looked, Arthur trembling like an aspen, and saw
that the corpse lay there in all its death beauty. But there
was no love in my own heart, nothing but loathing for the
foul Thing which had taken Lucy's shape without her soul. I
could see even Arthur's face grow hard as he looked. Present-
ly he said to Van Helsing, "Is this really Lucy's body, or
only a demon in her shape?"

"It is her body, and yet not it. But wait a while, and
you shall see her as she was, and is."

She seemed like a nightmare of Lucy as she lay there,
the pointed teeth, the blood stained, voluptuous mouth,
which made one shudder to see, the whole carnal and unspirit-
ed appearance, seeming like a devilish mockery of Lucy's
sweet purity. Van Helsing, with his usual methodicalness,
began taking the various contents from his bag and placing
them ready for use. First he took out a soldering iron and
some plumbing solder, and then small oil lamp, which gave out,
when lit in a corner of the tomb, gas which burned at a
fierce heat with a blue flame, then his operating knives,
which he placed to hand, and last a round wooden stake, some
two and a half or three inches thick and about three feet
long. One end of it was hardened by charring in the fire,
and was sharpened to a fine point. With this stake came a
heavy hammer, such as in households is used in the coal
cellar for breaking the lumps. To me, a doctor's preperations
for work of any kind are stimulating and bracing, but the
effect of these things on both Arthur and Quincey was to
cause them a sort of consternation. They both, however, kept
their courage, and remained silent and quiet.

When all was ready, Van Helsing said, "Before we do any-
thing, let me tell you this. It is out of the lore and ex-
perience of the ancients and of all those who have studied
the powers of the Un-Dead. When they become such, there comes
with the change the curse of immortality. They cannot die,
but must go on age after age adding new victims and multi-
plying the evils of the world. For all that die from the
preying of the Un-dead become themselves Un-dead, and prey on
their kind. And so the circle goes on ever widening, like as
the ripples from a stone thrown in the water. Friend Arthur,
if you had met that kiss which you know of before poor Lucy
die, or again, last night when you open your arms to her, you
would in time, when you had died, have become nosferatu, as
they call it in Eastern europe, and would for all time make
more of those Un-Deads that so have filled us with horror.
The career of this so unhappy dear lady is but just begun.
Those children whose blood she sucked are not as yet so much
the worse, but if she lives on, Un-Dead, more and more they
lose their blood and by her power over them they come to her,
and so she draw their blood with that so wicked mouth.  But if
she die in truth, then all cease. The tiny wounds of the
throats disappear, and they go back to their play unknowing
ever of what has been. But of the most blessed of all, when
this now Un-Dead be made to rest as true dead, then the soul
of the poor lady whom we love shall again be free. Instead of
working wickedness by night and growing more debased in the
assimilating of it by day, she shall take her place with the
other Angels. So that, my friend, it will be a blessed hand
for her that shall strike the blow that sets her free. To
this I am willing, but is there none amongst us who has a
better right? Will it be no joy to think of hereafter in the
silence of the night when sleep is not, `It was my hand that
sent her to the stars. It was the hand of him that loved her
best, the hand that of all she would herself have chosen, had
it been to her to choose?' Tell me if there be such a one
amongst us?"

We all looked at Arthur. He saw too, what we all did,
the infinite kindness which suggested that his should be the
hand which would restore Lucy to us as a holy, and not an
unholy, memory. He stepped forward and said bravely, though
his hand trembled, and his face was as pale as snow, "My true
friend, from the bottom of my broken heart I thank you. Tell
me what I am to do, and I shall not falter!"

Van Helsing laid a hand on his shoulder, and said, "Brave
lad! A moment's courage, and it is done. This stake must be
driven through her. It well be a fearful ordeal, be not de-
ceived in that, but it will be only a short time, and you
will then rejoice more than your pain was great. From this
grim tomb you will emerge as though you tread on air. But
you must not falter when once you have begun. Only think that
we, your true friends, are round you, and that we pray for
you all the time."

"Go on," said Arthur hoarsely."Tell me what I am to do."

"Take this stake in your left hand, ready to place to
the point over the heart, and the hammer in your right. Then
when we begin our prayer for the dead, I shall read him, I
have here the book, and the others shall follow, strike in
God's name, that so all may be well with the dead that we
love and that the Un-Dead pass away."

Arthur took the stake and the hammer, and when once his
mind was set on action his hands never trembled nor even
quivered. Van Helsing opened his missal and began to read,
and Quincey and I followed as well as we could.

Arthur placed the point over the heart, and as I looked
I could see its dint in the white flesh. Then he struck with
all his might.

The thing in the coffin writhed, and a hideous, blood-
curdling screech came from the opened red lips. The body
shook and quivered and twisted in wild contortions. The
sharp white champed together till the lips were cut, and the
mouth was smeared with a crimson foam. But Arthur never fal-
tered. He looked like a figure of Thor as his untrembling
arm rose and fell, driving deeper and deeper the mercy-
bearing stake, whilst the blood from the pierced heart well-
ed and spurted up around it. His face was set, and high
duty seemed to shine through it. The sight of it gave us
courage so that our voices seemed to ring through the little
vault.

And then the writhing and quivering of the body became
less, and the teeth seemed to champ, and the face to quiver.
Finally it lay still. The terrible task was over.

The hammer fell from Arthur's hand. He reeled and would
have fallen had we not caught him. The great drops of sweat
sprang from his forehead, and his breath came in broken gasps.
It had indeed been an awful strain on him, and had he not
been forced to his task by more than human considerations he
could never have gone through with it. For a few minutes we
were so taken up with him that we did not look towards the
coffin. When we did, however, a murmur of startled surprise
ran from one to the other of us. We gazed so eagerly that
Arthur rose, for he had been seated on the ground, and came
and looked too, and then a glad strange light broke over his
face and dispelled altogether the gloom of horror that lay
upon it.

There, in the coffin lay no longer the foul Thing that
we has so dreaded and grown to hate that the work of her de-
struction was yielded as a privilege to the one best entit-
led to it, but Lucy as we had seen her in life, with her face
of unequalled sweetness and purity. True that there were
there, as we had seen them in life, the traces of care and
pain and waste. But these were all dear to us, for they
marked her truth to what we knew. One and all we felt that
the holy calm that lay like sunshine over the wasted face
and form was only an earthly token and symbol of the calm
that was to reign for ever.

Van Helsing came and laid his hand on Arthur's shoulder,
and said to him, "And now, Arthur my friend, dear lad, am I
not forgiven?"

The reaction of the terrible strain came as he took the
old man's hand in his, and raising it to his lips, pressed it,
and said, "Forgiven! God bless you that you have given my
dear one her soul again, and me peace." He put his hands on
the Professor's shoulder, and laying his head on his breast,
cried for a while silently, whilst we stood unmoving.

When he raised his head Van Helsing said to him, "And
now, my child, you may kiss her. Kiss her dead lips if you
will, as she would have you to, if for her to choose. For
she is not a grinning devil now, not any more a foul Thing
for all eternity. No longer she is the devil's Un-Dead. She
is God's true dead, whose soul is with Him!"

Arthur bent and kissed her, and then we sent him and
Quincey out of the tomb. The Professor and I sawed the top
off the stake, leaving the point of it in the body. Then we
cut off the head and filled the mouth with garlic. We sold-
ered up the leaden coffin, screwed on the coffin lid, and
gathering up our belongings, came away. When the Professor
locked the door he gave the key to Arthur.

Outside the air was sweet, the sun shone, and the birds
sang, and it seemed as if all nature were tuned to a differ-
ent pitch. There was gladness and mirth and peace everywhere,
for we were at rest ourselves on one account, and we were
glad, though it was with a tempered joy.

Before we moved away Van Helsing said, "Now, my friends,
one step or our work is done, one the most harrowing to our-
selves. But there remains a greater task, to find out the
author of all this or sorrow and to stamp him out. I have
clues which we can follow, but it is a long task, and a diff-
icult one, and there is danger in it, and pain. Shall you not
all help me? We have learned to believe, all of us, is it
not so? And since so, do we not see our duty? Yes! And do
we not promise to go on to the bitter end?"

Each in turn, we took his hand, and the promise was made.
Then said the Professor as we moved off, "Two nights hence
you shall meet with me and dine together at seven of the
clock with friend John. I shall entreat two others, two that
you know not as yet, and I shall be ready to all our work
show and our plans unfold. Friend John, you come with me
home, for I have much to consult you about, and you can help
me. Tonight I leave for Amsterdam, but shall return tomorrow
night. And then begins our great quest. But first I shall
have much to say, so that you may know what to do and to
dread. Then our promise shall be made to each other anew. For
there is a terrible task before us, and once our feet are on
the ploughshare we must not draw back."





CHAPTER 17


DR. SEWARD'S DIARY-cont


When we arrived at the Berkely Hotel, Van Helsing found
a telegram waiting for him.

"Am coming up by train. Jonathan at Whitby. Important
news. Mina Harker."


The Professor was delighted. "Ah, that wonderful Madam
Mina," he said, "pearl among women! She arrive, but I can-
not stay. She must go to your house, friend John. You must
meet her at the station. Telegraph her en route so that she
may be prepared."

When the wire was dispatched he had a cup of tea. Over
it he told me of a diary kept by Jonathan Harker when abroad,
and gave me a typewritten copy of it, as also of Mrs. Harker's
diary at Whitby. "Take these," he said, "and study them well.
When I have returned you will be master of all the facts,
and we can then better enter on our inquisition. Keep them
safe, for there is in them much of treasure. You will need
all your faith, even you who have had such an experience as
that of today. What is here told," he laid his hand heavily
and gravely on the packet of papers as he spoke, "may be the
beginning of the end to you and me and many another, or it
may sound the knell of the Un-Dead who walk the earth. Read
all, I pray you, with the open mind, and if you can add in
any way to the story here told do so, for it is all import-
ant. You have kept a diary of all these so strange things,
is it not so? Yes! Then we shall go through all these to-
gether when we meet." He then made ready for his departure
and shortly drove off to Liverpool Street. I took my way to
Paddington, where I arrived about fifteen minutes before the
train came in.

The crowd melted away, after the bustling fashion com-
mon to arrival platforms, and I was beginning to feel uneasy,
lest I might miss my guest, when a sweet-faced, dainty look-
ing girl stepped up to me, and after a quick glance said,
"Dr. Seward, is it not?"

"And you are Mrs. Harker!" I answered at once, where-
upon she held out her hand.

"I knew you from the description of poor dear Lucy,
but. . ." She stopped suddenly, and a quick blush overspread
her face.

The blush that rose to my own cheeks somehow set us
both at ease, for it was a tacit answer to her own. I got her
luggage, which included a typewriter, and we took the Under-
ground to Fenchurch Street, after I had sent a wire to my
housekeeper to have a sitting room and a bedroom prepared at
once for Mrs. Harker.

In due time we arrived. She knew, of course, that the
place was a lunatic asylum, but I could see that she was un-
able to repress a shudder when we entered.

She told me that, if she might, she would come presently
to my study, as she had much to say. So here I am finishing
my entry in my phonograph diary whilst I await her. As yet
I have not had the chance of looking at the papers which Van
Helsing left with me, though they lie open before me. I must
get her interested in something, so that I may have an opp-
ortunity of reading them. She does not know how precious
time is, or what a task we have in hand. I must be careful
not to frighten her. Here she is!




MINA HARKER'S JOURNAL

29 September.--After I had tidied myself, I went down
to Dr. Seward's study. At the door I paused a moment, for I
thought I heard him talking with some one. As, however, he
had pressed me to be quick, I knocked at the door, and on his
calling out, "Come in," I entered.

To my intense surprise, there was no one with him. He
was quite alone, and on the table opposite him was what I
knew at once from the description to be a phonograph. I had
never seen one, and was much interested.

"I hope I did not keep you waiting," I said, "but I
stayed at the door as I heard you talking, and thought there
was someone with you."

"Oh," he replied with a smile, "I was only entering my
diary."

"Your diary?" I asked him in surprise.

"Yes," he answered. "I keep it in this." As he spoke
he laid his hand on the phonograph. I felt quite excited
over it, and blurted out, "Why, this beats even shorthand!
May I hear it say something?"

"Certainly," he replied with alacrity, and stood up to
put it in train for speaking. Then he paused, and a troubl-
ed look overspread his face.

"The fact is," he began awkwardly."I only keep my diary
in it, and as it is entirely, almost entirely, about my cases
it may be awkward, that is, I mean. . ." He stopped, and I
tried to help him out of his embarrassment.

"You helped to attend dear Lucy at the end. Let me hear
how she died, for all that I know of her, I shall be very
grateful. She was very, very dear to me."

To my surprise, he answered, with a horrorstruck look in
his face, "Tell you of her death? Not for the wide world!"

"Why not?" I asked, for some grave, terrible feeling
was coming over me.

Again he paused, and I could see that he was trying to
invent an excuse. At length, he stammered out, "You see, I
do not know how to pick out any particular part of the
diary."

Even while he was speaking an idea dawned upon him, and
he said with unconscious simplicity, in a different voice,
and with the naivete of a child, "that's quite true, upon my
honor. Honest Indian!"

I could not but smile, at which he grimaced."I gave my-
self away that time!" he said. "But do you know that, al-
though I have kept the diary for months past, it never once
struck me how I was going to find any particular part of it
in case I wanted to look it up?"

By this time my mind was made up that the diary of a
doctor who attended Lucy might have something to add to the
sum of our knowledge of that terrible Being, and I said
boldly, "Then, Dr. Seward, you had better let me copy it out
for you on my typewriter."

He grew to a positively deathly pallor as he said, "No!
No! No! For all the world. I wouldn't let you know that
terrible story.!"

Then it was terrible. My intuition was right! For a mo-
ment, I thought, and as my eyes ranged the room, unconscious-
ly looking for something or some opportunity to aid me, they
lit on a great batch of typewriting on the table. His eyes
caught the look in mine, and without his thinking, followed
their direction. As they saw the parcel he realized my mean-
ing.

"You do not know me," I said. "When you have read those
papers, my own diary and my husband's also, which I have
typed, you will know me better. I have not faltered in giv-
ing every thought of my own heart in this cause. But, of
course, you do not know me, yet, and I must not expect you
to trust me so far."

He is certainly a man of noble nature. Poor dear Lucy
was right about him. He stood up and opened a large drawer,
in which were arranged in order a number of hollow cylinders
of metal covered with dark wax, and said,

"You are quite right. I did not trust you because I did
not know you. But I know you now, and let me say that I
should have known you long ago. I know that Lucy told you of
me. She told me of you too. May I make the only atonement
in my power? Take the cylinders and hear them. The first
half-dozen of them are personal to me, and they will not
horrify you. Then you will know me better. Dinner will by
then be ready. In the meantime I shall read over some of
these documents, and shall be better able to understand cer-
tain things."

He carried the phonograph himself up to my sitting room
and adjusted it for me. Now I shall learn something pleasant,
I am sure. For it will tell me the other side of a true love
episode of which I know one side already.




DR. SEWARD'S DIARY


29 September.--I was so absorbed in that wonderful
diary of Jonathan Harker and that other of his wife that I
let the time run on without thinking. Mrs. Harker was not
down when the maid came to announce dinner, so I said, "She
is possibly tired. Let dinner wait an hour," and I went on
with my work. I had just finished Mrs. Harker's diary, when
she came in. She looked sweetly pretty, but very sad, and
her eyes were flushed with crying. This somehow moved me
much. Of late I have had cause for tears, God knows! But
the relief of them was denied me, and now the sight of those
sweet eyes, brightened by recent tears, went straight to my
heart. So I said as gently as I could, "I greatly fear I
have distressed you."

"Oh, no, not distressed me," she replied. "But I have
been more touched than I can say by your grief. That is a
wonderful machine, but it is cruelly true. It told me, in
its very tones, the anguish of your heart. It was like a soul
crying out to Almighty God. No one must hear them spoken
ever again! See, I have tried to be useful. I have copied
out the words on my typewriter, and none other need now hear
your heart beat, as I did."

"No one need ever know, shall ever know," I said in a
low voice. She laid her hand on mine and said very gravely,
"Ah, but they must!"

"Must! but why?" I asked.

"Because it is a part of the terrible story, a part of
poor Lucy's death and all that led to it. Because in the
struggle which we have before us to rid the earth of this
terrible monster we must have all the knowledge and all the
help which we can get. I think that the cylinders which you
gave me contained more than you intended me to know. But I
can see that there are in your record many lights to this
dark mystery. You will let me help, will you not? I know all
up to a certain point, and I see already, though your diary
only took me to 7 September, how poor Lucy was beset, and
how her terrible doom was being wrought out. Jonathan and I
have been working day and night since Professor Van Helsing
saw us. He is gone to Whitby to get more information, and
he will be here tomorrow to help us. We need have no secrets
amongst us. Working together and with absolute trust, we
can surely be stronger than if some of us were in the dark."

She looked at me so appealingly, and at the same time
manifested such courage and resolution in her bearing, that
I gave in at once to her wishes. "You shall," I said, "do as
you like in the matter. God forgive me if I do wrong! There
are terrible things yet to learn of. But if you have so far
traveled on the road to poor Lucy's death, you will not be
content, I know, to remain in the dark. Nay, the end, the
very end, may give you a gleam of peace. Come, there is
dinner. We must keep one another strong for what is before
us. We have a cruel and dreadful task. When you have eaten
you shall learn the rest, and I shall answer any questions
you ask, if there be anything which you do not understand,
though it was apparent to us who were present."

MINA HARKER'S JOURNAL


29 September.--After dinner I came with Dr. Seward to
his study. He brought back the phonograph from my room, and
I took a chair, and arranged the phonograph so that I could
touch it without getting up, and showed me how to stop it in
case I should want to pause. Then he very thoughtfully took
a chair, with his back to me, so that I might be as free as
possible, and began to read. I put the forked metal to my
ears and listened.

When the terrible story of Lucy's death, and all that
followed, was done, I lay back in my chair powerless. Fort-
unately I am not of a fainting disposition. When Dr. Seward
saw me he jumped up with a horrified exclamation, and hurr-
iedly taking a case bottle from the cupboard, gave me some
brandy, which in a few minutes somewhat restored me. My
brain was all in a whirl, and only that there came through
all the multitude of horrors, the holy ray of light that my
dear Lucy was at last at peace, I do not think I could have
borne it without making a scene. It is all so wild and mys-
terious, and strange that if I had not known Jonathan's ex-
perience in Transylvania I could not have believed. As it
was, I didn't know what to believe, and so got out of my
difficulty by attending to something else. I took the cover
off my typewriter, and said to Dr. Seward,

"Let me write this all out now. We must be ready for
Dr. Van Helsing when he comes. I have sent a telegram to
Jonathan to come on here when he arrives in London from
Whitby. In this matter dates are everything, and I think
that if we get all of our material ready, and have every item
put in chronological order, we shall have done much.

"You tell me that Lord Godalming and Mr. Morris are
coming too. Let us be able to tell them when they come."

He accordingly set the phonograph at a slow pace, and I
began to typewrite from the beginning of the seventeenth cy-
linder. I used manifold, and so took three copies of the
diary, just as I had done with the rest. It was late when I
got through, but Dr. Seward went about his work of going his
round of the patients. When he had finished he came back and
sat near me, reading, so that I did not feel too lonely
whilst I worked. How good and thoughtful he is. The world
seems full of good men, even if there are monsters in it.

Before I left him I remembered what Jonathan put in his
diary of the Professor's perturbation at reading something
in an evening paper at the station at Exeter, so, seeing
that Dr. Seward keeps his newspapers, I borrowed the files
of `The Westminster Gazette' and `The Pall Mall Gazette' and
took them to my room. I remember how much the `Dailygraph'
and `The Whitby Gazette', of which I had made cuttings, had
helped us to understand the terrible events at Whitby when
Count Dracula landed, so I shall look through the evening
papers since then, and perhaps I shall get some new light. I
am not sleepy, and the work will help to keep me quiet.




DR. SEWARD'S DIARY


30 September.--Mr. Harker arrived at nine o'clock. He
got his wife's wire just before starting. He is uncommonly
clever, if one can judge from his face, and full of energy.
If this journal be true, and judging by one's own wonderful
experiences, it must be, he is also a man of great nerve.
That going down to the vault a second time was a remarkable
piece of daring. After reading his account of it I was pre-
pared to meet a good specimen of manhood, but hardly the
quiet, business-like gentleman who came here today.


LATER.--After lunch Harker and his wife went back to
their own room, and as I passed a while ago I heard the click
of the typewriter. They are hard at it. Mrs. Harker says
that knitting together in chronological order every scrap of
evidence they have. Harker has got the letters between the
consignee of the boxes at Whitby and the carriers in London
who took charge of them. He is now reading his wife's tran-
script of my diary. I wonder what they make out of it. Here
it is. . .


Strange that it never struck me that the very next
house might be the Count's hiding place! Goodness knows that
we had enough clues from the conduct of the patient Renfield!
The bundle of letters relating to the purchase of the house
were with the transcript. Oh, if we had only had them earl-
ier we might have saved poor Lucy! Stop! That way madness
lies! Harker has gone back, and is again collecting material.
He says that by dinner time they will be able to show a
whole connected narrative. He thinks that in the meantime I
should see Renfield, as hitherto he has been a sort of index
to the coming and going of the Count. I hardly see this yet,
but when I get at the dates I suppose I shall. What a good
thing that Mrs. Harker put my cylinders into type! We never
could have found the dates otherwise.

I found Renfield sitting placidly in his room with his
hands folded, smiling benignly. At the moment he seemed as
sane as any one I ever saw. I sat down and talked with him
on a lot of subjects, all of which he treated naturally. He
then, of his own accord, spoke of going home, a subject he
has never mentioned to my knowledge during his sojourn here.
In fact, he spoke quite confidently of getting his discharge
at once. I believe that, had I not had the chat with Harker
and read the letters and the dates of his outbursts, I should
have been prepared to sign for him after a brief time of ob-
servation. As it is, I am darkly suspicious. All those out-
breaks were in some way linked with the proximity of the
Count. What then does this absolute content mean? Can it be
that his instinct is satisfied as to the vampire's ultimate
triumph? Stay. He is himself zoophagous, and in his wild
ravings outside the chapel door of the deserted house he al-
ways spoke of `master'. This all seems confirmation of our
idea. However, after a while I came away. My friend is just
a little too sane at present to make it safe to probe him
too deep with questions. He might begin to think, and
then. . .So I came away. I mistrust these quiet moods of
of his, so I have given the attendant a hint to look closely
after him, and to have a strait waistcoat ready in case of
need.





JOHNATHAN HARKER'S JOURNAL


29 September, in train to London.--When I received Mr.
Billington's courteous message that he would give me any in-
formation in his power I thought it best to go down to Whit-
by and make, on the spot, such inquiries as I wanted. It was
now my object to trace that horrid cargo of the Count's to
its place in London. Later, we may be able to deal with it.
Billington junior, a nice lad, met me at the station, and
brought me to his father's house, where they had decided that
I must spend the night. They are hospitable, with true York-
shire hospitality, give a guest everything and leave him
to do as he likes. They all knew that I was busy, and that
my stay was short, and Mr. Billington had ready in his office
all the papers concerning the consignment of boxes. It gave
me almost a turn to see again one of the letters which I had
seen on the Count's table before I knew of his diabolical
plans. Everything had been carefully thought out, and done
systematically and with precision. He seemed to have been
prepared for every obstacle which might be placed by acci-
dent in the way of his intentions being carried out. To use
and Americanism, he had `taken no chances', and the absolute
accuracy with which his instructions were fulfilled was
simply the logical result of his care. I saw the invoice, and
took note of it.`Fifty cases of common earth, to be used for
experimental purposes'. Also the copy of the letter to Car-
ter Paterson, and their reply. Of both these I got copies.
This was all the information Mr. Billington could give me, so
I went down to the port and saw the coastguards, the Customs
Officers and the harbor master, who kindly put me in commun-
ication with the men who had actually received the boxes.
Their tally was exact with the list, and they had nothing to
add to the simple description `fifty cases of common earth',
except that the boxes were `main and mortal heavy', and that
shifting them was dry work. One of them added that it was
hard lines that there wasn't any gentleman `such like as
like yourself, squire', to show some sort of appreciation of
their efforts in a liquid form. Another put in a rider that
the thirst then generated was such that even the time which
had elapsed had not completely allayed it. Needless to add,
I took care before leaving to lift, forever and adequately,
this source of reproach.

30 September.--The station master was good enough to
give me a line to his old companion the station master at
King's Cross, so that when I arrived there in the morning I
was able to ask him about the arrival of the boxes. He, too
put me at once in communication with the proper officials,
and I saw that their tally was correct with the original in-
voice. The opportunities of acquiring an abnormal thirst had
been here limited. A noble use of them had, however, been
made, and again I was compelled to deal with the result in
ex post facto manner.

From thence I went to Carter Paterson's central office,
where I met with the utmost courtesy. They looked up the
transaction in their day book and letter book, and at once
telephoned to their King's Cross office for more details. By
good fortune, the men who did the teaming were waiting for
work, and the official at once sent them over, sending also
by one of them the way-bill and all the papers connected
with the delivery of the boxes at Carfax. Here again I found
the tally agreeing exactly. The carriers' men were able to
supplement the paucity of the written words with a few more
details. These were, I shortly found, connected almost sole-
ly with the dusty nature of the job, and the consequent
thirst engendered in the operators. On my affording an opp-
ortunity, through the medium of the currency of the realm,
of the allaying, at a later period, this beneficial evil,
one of the men remarked,

"That `ere `ouse, guv'nor, is the rummiest I ever was
in. Blyme! But it ain't been touched sence a hundred years.
There was dust that thick in the place that you might have
slep' on it without `urtin' of yer bones. An' the place was
that neglected that yer might `ave smelled ole Jerusalem in
it. But the old chapel, that took the cike, that did! Me and
my mate, we thort we wouldn't never git out quick enough.
Lor', I wouldn't take less nor a quid a moment to stay there
arter dark."

Having been in the house, I could well believe him, but
if he knew what I know, he would, I think have raised his
terms.

Of one thing I am now satisfied. That all those boxes
which arrived at Whitby from Varna in the Demeter were safe-
ly deposited in the old chapel at Carfax. There should be
fifty of them there, unless any have since been removed, as
from Dr. Seward's diary I fear.


Later.--Mina and I have worked all day, and we have put
all the papers into order.




MINA HARKER'S JOURNAL


30 September.--I am so glad that I hardly know how to
contain myself. It is, I suppose, the reaction from the
haunting fear which I have had, that this terrible affair and
the reopening of his old wound might act detrimentally on
Jonathan. I saw him leave for Whitby with as brave a face as
could, but I was sick with apprehension. The effort has,
however, done him good. He was never so resolute, never so
strong, never so full of volcanic energy, as at present. It
is just as that dear, good Professor Van Helsing said, he is
true grit, and he improves under strain that would kill a
weaker nature. He came back full of life and hope and deter-
mination. We have got everything in order for tonight. I
feel myself quite wild with excitement. I suppose one ought
to pity anything so hunted as the Count. That is just it.
This thing is not human, not even a beast. To read Dr. Sew-
ard's account of poor Lucy's death, and what followed, is
enough to dry up the springs of pity in one's heart.


Later.--Lord Godalming and Mr. Morris arrived earlier
than we expected. Dr. Seward was out on business, and had
taken Jonathan with him, so I had to see them. It was to me
a painful meeting, for it brought back all poor dear Lucy's
hopes of only a few months ago. Of course they had heard
Lucy speak of me, and it seemed that Dr. Van Helsing, too,
had been quite `blowing my trumpet', as Mr. Morris expressed
it. Poor fellows, neither of them is aware that I know all
about the proposals they made to Lucy. They did not quite
know what to say or do, as they were ignorant of the amount
of my knowledge. So they had to keep on neutral subjects.
However, I thought the matter over, and came to the conclus-
ion that the best thing I could do would be to post them on
affairs right up to date. I knew from Dr. Seward's diary
that they had been at Lucy's death, her real death, and that
I need not fear to betray any secret before the time. So I
told them, as well as I could, that I had read all the papers
and diaries, and that my husband and I, having typewritten
them, had just finished putting them in order. I gave them
each a copy to read in the library. When Lord Godalming got
his and turned it over, it does make a pretty good pile, he
said, "Did you write all this, Mrs. Harker?"

I nodded, and he went on.

"I don't quite see the drift of it, but you people are
all so good and kind, and have been working so earnestly and
so energetically, that all I can do is to accept your ideas
blindfold and try to help you. I have had one lesson already
in accepting facts that should make a man humble to the last
hour of his life. Besides, I know you loved my Lucy. . ."

Here he turned away and covered his face with his hands.
I could hear the tears in his voice. Mr. Morris, with in-
stinctive delicacy, just laid a hand for a moment on his
shoulder, and then walked quietly out of the room. I suppose
there is something in a woman's nature that makes a man free
to break down before her and express his feelings on the
tender or emotional side without feeling it derogatory to
his manhood. For when Lord Godalming found himself alone
with me he sat down on the sofa and gave way utterly and op-
enly. I sat down beside him and took his hand. I hope he
didn't think it forward of me, and that if her ever thinks
of it afterwards he never will have such a thought. There I
wrong him. I know he never will. He is too true a gentle-
man. I said to him, for I could see that his heart was break-
ing, "I loved dear Lucy, and I know what she was to you, and
what you were to her. She and I were like sisters, and now
she is gone, will you not let me be like a sister to you in
your trouble? I know what sorrows you have had, though I
cannot measure the depth of them. If sympathy and pity can
help in your affliction, won't you let me be of some little
service, for Lucy's sake?"

In an instant the poor dear fellow was overwhelmed with
grief. It seemed to me that all that he had of late been
suffering in silence found a vent at once. He grew quite hy-
sterical, and raising his open hands, beat his palms together
in a perfect agony of grief. He stood up and then sat down
again, and the tears rained down his cheeks. I felt an in-
finite pity for him, and opened my arms unthinkingly. With
a sob he laid his head on my shoulder and cried like a wear-
ied child, whilst he shook with emotion.

We women have something of the mother in us that makes
us rise above smaller matters when the mother spirit is in-
voked. I felt this big sorrowing man's head resting on me,
as though it were that of a baby that some day may lie on my
bosom, and I stroked his hair as though he were my own child.
I never thought at the time how strange it all was.

After a little bit his sobs ceased, and he raised him-
self with an apology, though he made no disguise of his emo-
tion. He told me that for days and nights past, weary days
and sleepless nights, he had been unable to speak with any
one, as a man must speak in his time of sorrow. There was no
woman whose sympathy could be given to him, or with whom,
owing to the terrible circumstance with which his sorrow was
surrounded, he could speak freely.

"I know now how I suffered," he said, as he dried his
eyes, "but I do not know even yet, and none other can ever
know, how much your sweet sympathy has been to me today. I
shall know better in time, and believe me that, though I am
not ungrateful now, my gratitude will grow with my under-
standing. You will let me be like a brother, will you not,
for all our lives, for dear Lucy's sake?"

"For dear Lucy's sake," I said as we clasped hands."Ay,
and for your own sake," he added, "for if a man's esteem and
gratitude are ever worth the winning, you have won mine to-
day. If ever the future should bring to you a time when you
need a man's help, believe me, you will not call in vain. God
grant that no such time may ever come to you to break the
sunshine of your life, but if it should ever come, promise
me that you will let me know."

He was so earnest, and his sorrow was so fresh, that I
felt it would comfort him, so I said, "I promise."

As I came along the corridor I say Mr. Morris looking
out of a window. He turned as he heard my footsteps. "How
is Art?" he said. Then noticing my red eyes, he went on, "Ah,
I see you have been comforting him. Poor old fellow! He
needs it. No one but a woman can help a man when he is in
trouble of the heart, and he had no one to comfort him."

He bore his own trouble so bravely that my heart bled
for him. I saw the manuscript in his hand, and I knew that
when he read it he would realize how much I knew, so I said
to him, "I wish I could comfort all who suffer from the heart.
Will you let me be your friend, and will you come to me for
comfort if you need it? You will know later why I speak."

He saw that I was in earnest, and stooping, took my hand,
and raising it to his lips, kissed it. It seemed but poor
comfort to so brave and unselfish a soul, and impulsively I
bent over and kissed him. The tears rose in his eyes, and
there was a momentary choking in his throat. He said quite
calmly, "Little girl, you will never forget that true hearted
kindness, so long as ever you live!" Then he went into the
study to his friend.

"Little girl!" The very words he had used to Lucy, and,
oh, but he proved himself a friend.





CHAPTER 18


DR. SEWARD'S DIARY


30 September.--I got home at five o'clock, and found
that Godalming and Morris had not only arrived, but had
already studied the transcript of the various diaries and
letters which Harker had not yet returned from his visit to
the carriers' men, of whom Dr. Hennessey had written to me.
Mrs. Harker gave us a cup of tea, and I can honestly say that,
for the first time since I have lived in it, this old house
seemed like home. When we had finished, Mrs. Harker said,

"Dr. Seward, may I ask a favor? I want to see your pat-
ient, Mr. Renfield. Do let me see him. What you have said
of him in your diary interests me so much!"

She looked so appealing and so pretty that I could not
refuse her, and there was no possible reason why I should, so
I took her with me. When I went into the room, I told the man
that a lady would like to see him, to which he simply answer-
ed, "Why?"

"She is going through the house, and wants to see every
one in it," I answered.

"Oh, very well," he said, "let her come in, by all means,
but just wait a minute till I tidy up the place."

His method of tidying was peculiar, he simply swallowed
all the flies and spiders in the boxes before I could stop
him. It was quite evident that he feared, or was jealous of,
some interference. When he had got through his disgusting
task, he said cheerfully, "Let the lady come in," and sat
down on the edge of his bed with his head down, but with his
eyelids raised so that he could see her as she entered. For
a moment I thought that he might have some homicidal intent.
I remembered how quiet he had been just before he attacked
me in my own study, and I took care to stand where I could
seize him at once if he attempted to make a spring at her.

She came into the room with an easy gracefulness which
would at once command the respect of any lunatic, for easi-
ness is one of the qualities mad people most respect. She
walked over to him, smiling pleasantly, and held out her hand.

"Good evening, Mr. Renfield," said she. "You see, I
know you, for Dr. Seward has told me of you." He made no
immediate reply, but eyed her all over intently with a set
frown on his face. This look gave way to one of wonder, which
merged in doubt, then to my intense astonishment he said,
"You're not the girl the doctor wanted to marry, are you? You
can't be, you know, for she's dead."

Mrs. Harker smiled sweetly as she replied, "Oh no! I
have a husband of my own, to whom I was married before I ever
saw Dr. Seward, or he me. I am Mrs. Harker."

"Then what are you doing here?"

"My husband and I are staying on a visit with Dr. Seward."

"Then don't stay."

"But why not?"

I thought that this style of conversation might not be
pleasant to Mrs. Harker, any more than it was to me, so I
joined in, "How did you know I wanted to marry anyone?"

His reply was simply contemptuous, given in a pause in
which he turned his eyes from Mrs. Harker to me, instantly
turning them back again, "What an asinine question!"

"I don't see that at all, Mr. Renfield," said Mrs. Harker,
at once championing me.

He replied to her with as much courtesy and respect as
he had shown contempt to me, "You will, of course, under-
stand, Mrs. Harker, that when a man is so loved and honored
as our host is, everything regarding him is of interest in
our little community. Dr. Seward is loved not only by his
household and his friends, but even by his patients, who, be-
ing some of them hardly in mental equilibrium, are apt to
distort causes and effects. Since I myself have been an in-
mate of a lunatic asylum, I cannot but notice that the soph-
istic tendencies of some of its inmates lean towards the
errors of non causa and ignoratio elenche."

I positively opened my eyes at this new development.
Here was my own pet lunatic, the most pronounced of his type
that I had ever met with, talking elemental philosophy, and
with the manner of a polished gentleman. I wonder if it was
Mrs. Harker's presence which had touched some chord in his
memory. If this new phase was spontaneous, or in any way due
to her unconscious influence, she must have some rare gift
or power.

We continued to talk for some time, and seeing that he
was seemingly quite reasonable, she ventured, looking at me
questioningly as she began, to lead him to his favorite topic.
I was again astonished, for he addressed himself to the ques-
tion with the impartiality of the completest sanity. He even
took himself as an example when he mentioned certain things.

"Why, I myself am an instance of a man who had a strange
belief. Indeed, it was no wonder that my friends were alarmed,
and insisted on my being put under control. I used to fancy
that life was a positive and perpetual entity, and that by
consuming a multitude of live things, no matter how low in
the scale of creation, one might indefinitely prolong life.
At times I held the belief so strongly that I actually tried
to take human life. The doctor here will bear me out that
on one occasion I tried to kill him for the purpose of
strengthening my vital powers by the assimilation with my
own body of his life through the medium of his blood, relying
of course, upon the Scriptural phrase, `For the blood is the
life.' Though, indeed, the vendor of a certain nostrum has
vulgarized the truism to the very point of contempt. Isn't
that true, doctor?"

I nodded assent, for I was so amazed that I hardly knew
what to either think or say, it was hard to imagine that I
had seen him eat up his spiders and flies not five minutes
before. Looking at my watch, I saw that I should go to the
station to meet Van Helsing, so I told Mrs. Harker that it
was time to leave.

She came at once, after saying pleasantly to Mr. Renfield,
"Goodbye, and I hope I may see you often, under auspices plea-
santer to yourself."

To which, to my astonishment, he replied, "Goodbye, my
dear. I pray God I may never see your sweet face again. May
He bless and keep you!"

When I went to the station to meet Van Helsing I left
the boys behind me. Poor Art seemed more cheerful than he has
been since Lucy first took ill, and Quincey is more like his
own bright self than he has been for many a long day.

Van Helsing stepped from the carriage with the eager
nimbleness of a boy. He saw me at once, and rushed up to me,
saying, "Ah, friend John, how goes all? Well? So! I have
been busy, for I come here to stay if need be.  All affairs are
settled with me, and I have much to tell. Madam Mina is with
you? Yes. And her so fine husband? And Arthur and my friend
Quincey, they are with you, too? Good!"

As I drove to the house I told him of what had passed,
and of how my own diary had come to be of some use through
Mrs. Harker's suggestion, at which the Professor interrupted
me.

"Ah, that wonderful Madam Mina! She has man's brain, a
brain that a man should have were he much gifted, and a wo-
man's heart. The good God fashioned her for a purpose, believe
me, when He made that so good combination. Friend John, up to
now fortune has made that woman of help to us, after tonight
she must not have to do with this so terrible affair. It is
not good that she run a risk so great. We men are determined,
nay, are we not pledged, to destroy this monster? But it is
no part for a woman. Even if she be not harmed, her heart may
fail her in so much and so many horrors and hereafter she
may suffer, both in waking, from her nerves, and in sleep, from
her dreams. And, besides, she is young woman and not so
long married, there may be other things to think of some
time, if not now. You tell me she has wrote all, then she must
consult with us, but tomorrow she say goodbye to this work,
and we go alone."

I agreed heartily with him, and then I told him what we
had found in his absence, that the house which Dracula had
bought was the very next one to my own. He was amazed, and a
great concern seemed to come on him.

"Oh that we had known it before!" he said, "for then we
might have reached him in time to save poor Lucy. However,
`the milk that is spilt cries not out afterwards,'as you say.
We shall not think of that, but go on our way to the end."
Then he fell into a silence that lasted till we entered my
own gateway. Before we went to prepare for dinner he said
to Mrs. Harker, "I am told, Madam Mina, by my friend John
that you and your husband have put up in exact order all
things that have been, up to this moment."

"Not up to this moment, Professor," she said impulsively,
"but up to this morning."

"But why not up to now? We have seen hitherto how good
light all the little things have made. We have told our se-
crets, and yet no one who has told is the worse for it."

Mrs. Harker began to blush, and taking a paper from her
pockets, she said, "Dr. Van Helsing, will you read this,
and tell me if it must go in. It is my record of today. I
too have seen the need of putting down at present everything,
however trivial, but there is little in this except what is
personal. Must it go in?"

The Professor read it over gravely, and handed it back,
saying, "It need not go in if you do not wish it, but I pray
that it may. It can but make your husband love you the more,
and all us, your friends, more honor you, as well as more
esteem and love." She took it back with another blush and a
bright smile.

And so now, up to this very hour, all the records we
have are complete and in order. The Professor took away one
copy to study after dinner, and before our meeting, which is
fixed for nine o'clock. The rest of us have already read
everything, so when we meet in the study we shall all be in-
formed as to facts, and can arrange our plan of battle with
this terrible and mysterious enemy.





MINA HARKER'S JOURNAL


30 September.--When we met in Dr. Seward's study two
hours after dinner, which had been at six o'clock, we un-
consciously formed a sort of board or committee. Professor
Van Helsing took the head of the table, to which Dr. Seward
motioned him as he came into the room. He made me sit next
to him on his right, and asked me to act as secretary. Jon-
athan sat next to me. Opposite us were Lord Godalming, Dr.
Seward, and Mr. Morris, Lord Godalming being next the Pro-
fessor, and Dr. Seward in the center.

The Professor said, "I may, I suppose, take it that we
are all acquainted with the facts that are in these papers."
We all expressed assent, and he went on, "Then it were, I
think, good that I tell you something of the kind of enemy
with which we have to deal. I shall then make known to you
something of the history of this man, which has been as-
certained for me. So we then can discuss how we shall act,
and can take our measure according.

"There are such beings as vampires, some of us have ev-
idence that they exist. Even had we not the proof of our
own unhappy experience, the teachings and the records of the
past give proof enough for sane peoples. I admit that at the
first I was sceptic. Were it not that through long years I
have trained myself to keep an open mind, I could not have
believed until such time as that fact thunder on my ear.`See!
See! I prove, I prove.' Alas! Had I known at first what now
I know, nay, had I even guess at him, one so precious life
had been spared to many of us who did love her. But that is
gone, and we must so work, that other poor souls perish not,
whilst we can save. The nosferatu do not die like the bee
when he sting once. He is only stronger, and being stronger,
have yet more power to work evil. This vampire which is
amongst us is of himself so strong in person as twenty men,
he is of cunning more than mortal, for his cunning be the
growth of ages, he have still the aids of necromancy, which
is, as his etymology imply, the divination by the dead, and
all the dead that he can come nigh to are for him at command,
he is brute, and more than brute, he is devil in callous, and
the heart of him is not, he can, within his range, direct the
elements, the storm, the fog, the thunder, he can command all
the meaner things, the rat, and the owl, and the bat, the
moth, and the fox, and the wolf, he can grow and become small,
and he can at times vanish and come unknown. How then are we
to begin our strike to destroy him? How shall we find his
where, and having found it, how can we destroy? My friends,
this is much, it is a terrible task that we undertake, and
there may be consequence to make the brave shudder. For if
we fail in this our fight he must surely win, and then where
end we? Life is nothings, I heed him not. But to fail here,
is not mere life or death. It is that we become as him, that
we henceforward become foul things of the night like him,
without heart or conscience, preying on the bodies and the
souls of those we love best. To us forever are the gates of
heaven shut, for who shall open them to us again? We go on
for all time abhorred by all, a blot on the face of God's
sunshine, an arrow in the side of Him who died for man. But
we are face to face with duty, and in such case must we
shrink? For me, I say no, but then I am old, and life, with
his sunshine, his fair places, his song of birds, his music
and his love, lie far behind. You others are young. Some
have seen sorrow, but there are fair days yet in store. What
say you?"

Whilst he was speaking, Jonathan had taken my hand. I
feared, oh so much, that the appalling nature of our danger
was overcoming him when I saw his hand stretch out, but it
was life to me to feel its touch, so strong, so self reliant,
so resolute.  A brave man's hand can speak for itself, it does
not even need a woman's love to hear its music.

When the Professor had done speaking my husband looked
in my eyes, and I in his, there was no need for speaking
between us.

"I answer for Mina and myself," he said.

"Count me in, Professor," said Mr. Quincey Morris,
laconically as usual.

"I am with you," said Lord Godalming, "for Lucy's sake,
if for no other reason."

Dr. Seward simply nodded.

The Professor stood up and, after laying his golden cru-
cifix on the table, held out his hand on either side. I took
his right hand, and Lord Godalming his left, Jonathan held
my right with his left and stretched across to Mr. Morris. So
as we all took hands our solemn compact was made. I felt my
heart icy cold, but it did not even occur to me to draw back.
We resumed our places, and Dr. Van Helsing went on with a
sort of cheerfulness which showed that the serious work had
begun. It was to be taken as gravely, and in as businesslike
a way, as any other transaction of life.

"Well, you know what we have to contend against, but we
too, are not without strength. We have on our side power of
combination, a power denied to the vampire kind, we have
sources of science, we are free to act and think, and the
hours of the day and the night are ours equally. In fact, so
far as our powers extend, they are unfettered, and we are
free to use them. We have self devotion in a cause and an end
to achieve which is not a selfish one. These things are much.

"Now let us see how far the general powers arrayed ag-
ainst us are restrict, and how the individual cannot. In fine,
let us consider the limitations of the vampire in general,
and of this one in particular.

"All we have to go upon are traditions and supersti-
tions. These do not at the first appear much, when the matter
is one of life and death, nay of more than either life or
death. Yet must we be satisfied, in the first place because we
have to be, no other means is at our control, and secondly,
because, after all these things, tradition and superstition,
are everything. Does not the belief in vampires rest for
others, though not, alas! for us, on them! A year ago which
of us would have received such a possibility, in the midst of
our scientific, sceptical, matter-of-fact nineteenth century?
We even scouted a belief that we saw justified under our
very eyes. Take it, then, that the vampire, and the belief
in his limitations and his cure, rest for the moment on the
same base. For, let me tell you, he is known everywhere that
men have been. In old Greece, in old Rome, he flourish in
Germany all over, in France, in India, even in the Chermosese,
and in China, so far from us in all ways, there even is he,
and the peoples for him at this day. He have follow the wake
of the berserker Icelander, the devil-begotten Hun, the Slav,
the Saxon, the Magyar.

"So far, then, we have all we may act upon, and let me
tell you that very much of the beliefs are justified by what
we have seen in our own so unhappy experience. The vampire
live on, and cannot die by mere passing of the time, he can
flourish when that he can fatten on the blood of the living.
Even more, we have seen amongst us that he can even grow
younger, that his vital faculties grow strenuous, and seem as
though they refresh themselves when his special pabulum is
plenty.

"But he cannot flourish without this diet, he eat not
as others. Even friend Jonathan, who lived with him for
weeks, did never see him eat, never! He throws no shadow,
he make in the mirror no reflect, as again Jonathan observe.
He has the strength of many of his hand, witness again Jona-
than when he shut the door against the wolves, and when he
help him from the diligence too. He can transform himself to
wolf, as we gather from the ship arrival in Whitby, when he
tear open the dog, he can be as bat, as Madam Mina saw him on
the window at Whitby, and as friend John saw him fly from
this so near house, and as my friend Quincey saw him at the
window of Miss Lucy.

"He can come in mist which he create, that noble ship's
captain proved him of this, but, from what we know, the dis-
tance he can make this mist is limited, and it can only be
round himself.

"He come on moonlight rays as elemental dust, as again
Jonathan saw those sisters in the castle of Dracula. He be-
come so small, we ourselves saw Miss Lucy, ere she was at
peace, slip through a hairbreadth space at the tomb door. He
can, when once he find his way, come out from anything or
into anything, no matter how close it be bound or even fused
up with fire, solder you call it. He can see in the dark, no
small power this, in a world which is one half shut from the
light. Ah, but hear me through.

"He can do all these things, yet he is not free. Nay,
he is even more prisoner than the slave of the galley, than
the madman in his cell. He cannot go where he lists, he who
is not of nature has yet to obey some of nature's laws, why
we know not. He may not enter anywhere at the first, unless
there be some one of the household who bid him to come,
though afterwards he can come as he please. His power ceases,
as does that of all evil things, at the coming of the day.

"Only at certain times can he have limited freedom. If
he be not at the place whither he is bound, he can only
change himself at noon or at exact sunrise or sunset. These
things we are told, and in this record of ours we have proof
by inference. Thus, whereas he can do as he will within his
limit, when he have his earth-home, his coffin-home, his hell-
home, the place unhallowed, as we saw when he went to the
grave of the suicide at Whitby, still at other time he can
only change when the time come. It is said, too, that he can
only pass running water at the slack or the flood of the
tide. Then there are things which so afflict him that he has
no power, as the garlic that we know of, and as for things
sacred, as this symbol, my crucifix, that was amongst us even
now when we resolve, to them he is nothing, but in their
presence he take his place far off and silent with respect.
There are others, too, which I shall tell you of, lest in our
seeking we may need them.

"The branch of wild rose on his coffin keep him that he
move not from it, a sacred bullet fired into the coffin kill
him so that he be true dead, and as for the stake through
him, we know already of its peace, or the cut off head that
giveth rest. We have seen it with our eyes.

"Thus when we find the habitation of this man-that-was,
we can confine him to his coffin and destroy him, if we obey
what we know. But he is clever. I have asked my friend
Arminius, of Buda-Pesth University, to make his record, and
from all the means that are, he tell me of what he has been.
He must, indeed, have been that Voivode Dracula who won his
name against the Turk, over the great river on the very
frontier of Turkey-land. If it be so, then was he no common
man, for in that time, and for centuries after, he was spoken
of as the cleverest and the most cunning, as well as the
bravest of the sons of the `land beyond the forest.' That
mighty brain and that iron resolution went with him to his
grave, and are even now arrayed against us. The Draculas
were, says Arminius, a great and noble race, though now and
again were scions who were held by their coevals to have had
dealings with the Evil One. They learned his secrets in the
Scholomance, amongst the mountains over Lake Hermanstadt,
where the devil claims the tenth scholar as his due. In the
records are such words as `stregoica' witch, `ordog' and
`pokol' Satan and hell, and in one manuscript this very
Dracula is spoken of as `wampyr,'which we all understand too
well. There have been from the loins of this very one great
men and good women, and their graves make sacred the earth
where alone this foulness can dwell. For it is not the least
of its terrors that this evil thing is rooted deep in all
good, in soil barren of holy memories it cannot rest."

Whilst they were talking Mr. Morris was looking steadily
at the window, and he now got up quietly, and went out of the
room. There was a little pause, and then the Professor went
on.

"And now we must settle what we do. We have here much
data, and we must proceed to lay out our campaign. We know
from the inquiry of Jonathan that from the castle to Whitby
came fifty boxes of earth, all of which were delivered at
Carfax, we also know that at least some of these boxes have
been removed. It seems to me, that our first step should be
to ascertain whether all the rest remain in the house beyond
that wall where we look today, or whether any more have been
removed. If the latter, we must trace. . ."

Here we were interrupted in a very startling way. Out-
side the house came the sound of a pistol shot, the glass of
the window was shattered with a bullet, which ricochetting
from the top of the embrasure, struck the far wall of the
room. I am afraid I am at heart a coward, for I shrieked
out. The men all jumped to their feet, Lord Godalming flew
over to the window and threw up the sash. As he did so we
heard Mr. Morris' voice without, "Sorry! I fear I have
alarmed you. I shall come in and tell you about it."

A minute later he came in and said, "It was an idiotic
thing of me to do, and I ask your pardon, Mrs. Harker, most
sincerely, I fear I must have frightened you terribly. But
the fact is that whilst the Professor was talking there came
a big bat and sat on the window sill. I have got such a
horror of the damned brutes from recent events that I cannot
stand them, and I went out to have a shot, as I have been
doing of late of evenings, whenever I have seen one. You
used to laugh at me for it then, Art."

"Did you hit it?" asked Dr. Van Helsing.

"I don't know, I fancy not, for it flew away into the
wood." Without saying any more he took his seat, and the
Professor began to resume his statement.

"We must trace each of these boxes, and when we are
ready, we must either capture or kill this monster in his
lair, or we must, so to speak, sterilize the earth, so that
no more he can seek safety in it. Thus in the end we may find
him in his form of man between the hours of noon and sunset,
and so engage with him when he is at his most weak.

"And now for you, Madam Mina, this night is the end until
all be well. You are too precious to us to have such risk.
When we part tonight, you no more must question. We shall
tell you all in good time. We are men and are able to bear,
but you must be our star and our hope, and we shall act all
the more free that you are not in the danger, such as we are."

All the men, even Jonathan, seemed relieved, but it did
not seem to me good that they should brave danger and, per-
haps lessen their safety, strength being the best safety,
through care of me, but their minds were made up, and though
it was a bitter pill for me to swallow, I could say nothing,
save to accept their chivalrous care of me.

Mr. Morris resumed the discussion, "As there is no time
to lose, I vote we have a look at his house right now. Time
is everything with him, and swift action on our part may save
another victim."

I own that my heart began to fail me when the time for
action came so close, but I did not say anything, for I had
a greater fear that if I appeared as a drag or a hindrance
to their work, they might even leave me out of their counsels
altogether. They have now gone off to Carfax, with means to
get into the house.

Manlike, they had told me to go to bed and sleep, as if
a woman can sleep when those she loves are in danger! I shall
lie down, and pretend to sleep, lest Jonathan have added
anxiety about me when he returns.




DR. SEWARD'S DIARY


1 October, 4 A.M.--Just as we were about to leave the
house, an urgent message was brought to me from Renfield to
know if I would see him at once, as he had something of the
utmost importance to say to me. I told the messenger to say
that I would attend to his wishes in the morning, I was busy
just at the moment.

The attendant added, "He seems very importunate, sir.
I have never seen him so eager. I don't know but what, if you
don't see him soon, he will have one of his violent fits." I
knew the man would not have said this without some cause, so
I said, "All right, I'll go now," and I asked the others to
wait a few minutes for me, as I had to go and see my patient.

"Take me with you, friend John," said the Professor."His
case in your diary interest me much, and it had bearing, too,
now and again on our case. I should much like to see him,
and especial when his mind is disturbed."

"May I come also?" asked Lord Godalming.

"Me too?" said Quincey Morris. "May I come?" said
Harker. I nodded, and we all went down the passage together.

We found him in a state of considerable excitement, but
far more rational in his speech and manner than I had ever
seen him. There was an unusual understanding of himself,
which was unlike anything I had ever met with in a lunatic,
and he took it for granted that his reasons would prevail
with others entirely sane. We all five went into the room,
but none of the others at first said anything. His request
was that I would at once release him from the asylum and
send him home. This he backed up with arguments regarding his
complete recovery, and adduced his own existing sanity.

"I appeal to your friends, "he said, "they will, perhaps,
not mind sitting in judgement on my case. By the way, you
have not introduced me."

I was so much astonished, that the oddness of introduc-
ing a madman in an asylum did not strike me at the moment,
and besides, there was a certain dignity in the man's manner,
so much of the habit of equality, that I at once made the
introduction, "Lord Godalming, Professor Van Helsing, Mr.
Quincey Morris, of Texas, Mr. Jonathan Harker, Mr. Renfield."

He shook hands with each of them, saying in turn, "Lord
Godalming, I had the honor of seconding your father at the
Windham, I grieve to know, by your holding the title, that
he is no more. He was a man loved and honored by all who
knew him, and in his youth was, I have heard, the inventor
of a burnt rum punch, much patronized on Derby night. Mr.
Morris, you should be proud of your great state. Its recep-
tion into the Union was a precedent which may have far-
reaching effects hereafter, when the Pole and the Tropics
may hold alliance to the Stars and Stripes. The power of
Treaty may yet prove a vast engine of enlargement, when the
Monroe doctrine takes its true place as a political fable.
What shall any man say of his pleasure at meeting Van Hel-
sing? Sir, I make no apology for dropping all forms of
conventional prefix. When an individual has revolutionized
therapeutics by his discovery of the continuous evolution of
brain matter, conventional forms are unfitting, since they
would seem to limit him to one of a class. You, gentlemen,
who by nationality, by heredity, or by the possession of
natural gifts, are fitted to hold your respective places in
the moving world, I take to witness that I am as sane as at
least the majority of men who are in full possession of
their liberties. And I am sure that you, Dr. Seward, human-
itarian and medico-jurist as well as scientist, will deem it
a moral duty to deal with me as one to be considered as un-
der exceptional circumstances."He made this last appeal with
a courtly air of conviction which was not without its own
charm.

I think we were all staggered. For my own part, I was
under the conviction, despite my knowledge of the man's
character and history, that his reason had been restored, and
I felt under a strong impulse to tell him that I was satis-
fied as to his sanity, and would see about the necessary
formalities for his release in the morning. I thought it
better to wait, however, before making so grave a statement,
for of old I knew the sudden changes to which this parti-
cular patient was liable. So I contented myself with making
a general statement that he appeared to be improving very
rapidly, that I would have a longer chat with him in the
morning, and would then see what I could do in the direction
of meeting his wishes.

This did not at all satisfy him, for he said quickly,
"But I fear, Dr. Seward, that you hardly apprehend my wish.
I desire to go at once, here, now, this very hour, this very
moment, if I may. Time presses, and in our implied agree-
ment with the old scytheman it is of the essence of the con-
tract. I am sure it is only necessary to put before so
admirable a practitioner as Dr. Seward so simple, yet so
momentous a wish, to ensure its fulfilment."

He looked at me keenly, and seeing the negative in my
face, turned to the others, and scrutinized them closely. Not
meeting any sufficient response, he went on, "Is it possible
that I have erred in my supposition?"

"You have," I said frankly, but at the same time, as I
felt, brutally.

There was a considerable pause, and then he said slowly,
"Then I suppose I must only shift my ground of request. Let
me ask for this concession, boon, privilege, what you will.
I am content to implore in such a case, not on personal
grounds, but for the sake of others. I am not at liberty to
give you the whole of my reasons, but you may, I assure you,
take it from me that they are good ones, sound and unselfish,
and spring from the highest sense of duty.

"Could you look, sir, into my heart, you would approve
to the full the sentiments which animate me. Nay, more, you
would count me amongst the best and truest of your friends."

Again he looked at us all keenly. I had a growing con-
viction that this sudden change of his entire intellectual
method was but yet another phase of his madness, and so
determined to let him go on a little longer, knowing from
experience that he would, like all lunatics, give himself
away in the end. Van Helsing was gazing at him with a look
of utmost intensity, his bushy eyebrows almost meeting with
the fixed concentration of his look. He said to Renfield in
a tone which did not surprise me at the time, but only when
I thought of it afterwards, for it was as of one addressing
an equal, "Can you not tell frankly your real reason for
wishing to be free tonight? I will undertake that if you
will satisfy even me, a stranger, without prejudice, and
with the habit of keeping an open mind, Dr. Seward will give
you, at his own risk and on his own responsibility, the
privilege you seek."

He shook his head sadly, and with a look of poignant
regret on his face. The Professor went on, "Come, sir,
bethink yourself. You claim the privilege of reason in the
highest degree, since you seek to impress us with your com-
plete reasonableness. You do this, whose sanity we have
reason to doubt, since you are not yet released from medical
treatment for this very defect. If you will not help us in
our effort to choose the wisest course, how can we perform
the duty which you yourself put upon us? Be wise, and help
us, and if we can we shall aid you to achieve your wish."

He still shook his head as he said, "Dr. Van Helsing,
I have nothing to say. Your argument is complete, and if I
were free to speak I should not hesitate a moment, but I am
not my own master in the matter. I can only ask you to trust
me. If I am refused, the responsibility does not rest with
me."

I thought it was now time to end the scene, which was
becoming too comically grave, so I went towards the door,
simply saying, "Come, my friends, we have work to do.
Goodnight."

As, however, I got near the door, a new change came
over the patient. He moved towards me so quickly that for
the moment I feared that he was about to make another homi-
cidal attack. My fears, however, were groundless, for he
held up his two hands imploringly, and made his petition in
a moving manner. As he saw that the very excess of his
emotion was militating against him, by restoring us more
to our old relations, he became still more demonstrative. I
glanced at Van Helsing, and saw my conviction reflected in
his eyes, so I became a little more fixed in my manner, if
not more stern, and motioned to him that his efforts were
unavailing. I had previously seen something of the same con-
stantly growing excitement in him when he had to make some
request of which at the time he had thought much, such for
instance, as when he wanted a cat, and I was prepared to see
the collapse into the same sullen acquiescence on this
occasion.

My expectation was not realized, for when he found that
his appeal would not be successful, he got into quite a fran-
tic condition. He threw himself on his knees, and held up his
hands, wringing them in plaintive supplication, and poured
forth a torrent of entreaty, with the tears rolling down his
cheeks, and his whole face and form expressive of the deepest
emotion.

"Let me entreat you, Dr. Seward, oh, let me implore you,
to let me out of this house at once. Send me away how you
will and where you will, send keepers with me with whips and
chains, let them take me in a strait waistcoat, manacled and
leg-ironed, even to gaol, but let me go out of this. You don't
know what you do by keeping me here. I am speaking from the
depths of my heart, of my very soul. You don't know whom you
wrong, or how, and I may not tell. Woe is me! I may not tell.
By all you hold sacred, by all you hold dear, by your love
that is lost, by your hope that lives, for the sake of the
Almighty, take me out of this and save my soul from guilt!
Can't you hear me, man? Can't you understand? Will you never
learn? Don't you know that I am sane and earnest now, that I
am no lunatic in a mad fit, but a sane man fighting for his
soul? Oh, hear me! Hear me! Let me go, let me go, let me
go!"

I thought that the longer this went on the wilder he
would get, and so would bring on a fit, so I took him by the
hand and raised him up.

"Come," I said sternly, "no more of this, we have had
quite enough already. Get to your bed and try to behave more
discreetly."

He suddenly stopped and looked at me intently for sev-
eral moments. Then, without a word, he rose and moving over,
sat down on the side of the bed. The collapse had come, as
on former occasions, just as I had expected.

When I was leaving the room, last of our party, he said
to me in a quiet, well-bred voice, "You will, I trust, Dr.
Seward, do me the justice to bear in mind, later on, that I
did what I could to convince you tonight."





CHAPTER 19


JONATHAN HARKER'S JOURNAL


1 October, 5 A.M.--I went with the party to the search
with an easy mind, for I think I never saw Mina so absolutely
strong and well. I am so glad that she consented to hold
back and let us men do the work. Somehow, it was a dread to
me that she was in this fearful business at all, but now
that her work is done, and that it is due to her energy and
brains and foresight that the whole story is put together in
such a way that every point tells, she may well feel that
her part is finished, and that she can henceforth leave the
rest to us. We were, I think, all a little upset by the
scene with Mr. Renfield. When we came away from his room we
were silent till we got back to the study.

Then Mr. Morris said to Dr. Seward, "Say, Jack, if that
man wasn't attempting a bluff, he is about the sanest lunatic
I ever saw. I'm not sure, but I believe that he had some
serious purpose, and if he had, it was pretty rough on him
not to get a chance."

Lord Godalming and I were silent, but Dr. Van Helsing
added, "Friend John, you know more lunatics than I do, and
I'm glad of it, for I fear that if it had been to me to de-
cide I would before that last hysterical outburst have given
him free. But we live and learn, and in our present task we
must take no chance, as my friend Quincey would say. All is
best as they are."

Dr. Seward seemed to answer them both in a dreamy kind
of way, "I don't know but that I agree with you. If that
man had been an ordinary lunatic I would have taken my
chance of trusting him, but he seems so mixed up with the
Count in an indexy kind of way that I am afraid of doing any-
thing wrong by helping his fads. I can't forget how he prayed
with almost equal fervor for a cat, and then tried to tear my
throat out with his teeth.  Besides, he called the Count `lord
and master', and he may want to get out to help him in some
diabolical way. That horrid thing has the wolves and the rats
and his own kind to help him, so I suppose he isn't above
trying to use a respectable lunatic. He certainly did seem
earnest, though. I only hope we have done what is best.
These things, in conjunction with the wild work we have in
hand, help to unnerve a man."

The Professor stepped over, and laying his hand on his
shoulder, said in his grave, kindly way, "Friend John, have
no fear. We are trying to do our duty in a very sad and
terrible case, we can only do as we deem best. What else
have we to hope for, except the pity of the good God?"

Lord Godalming had slipped away for a few minutes, but
now he returned. He held up a little silver whistle, as he
remarked, "That old place may be full of rats, and if so,
I've got an antidote on call."

Having passed the wall, we took our way to the house,
taking care to keep in the shadows of the trees on the lawn
when the moonlight shone out. When we got to the porch the
Professor opened his bag and took out a lot of things, which
he laid on the step, sorting them into four little groups,
evidently one for each. Then he spoke.

"My friends, we are going into a terrible danger, and we
need arms of many kinds. Our enemy is not merely spiritual.
Remember that he has the strength of twenty men, and that,
though our necks or our windpipes are of the common kind, and
therefore breakable or crushable, his are not amenable to
mere strength. A stronger man, or a body of men more strong
in all than him, can at certain times hold him, but they can-
not hurt him as we can be hurt by him. We must, therefore,
guard ourselves from his touch. Keep this near your heart."
As he spoke he lifted a little silver crucifix and held it
out to me, I being nearest to him, "put these flowers round
your neck," here he handed to me a wreath of withered garlic
blossoms, "for other enemies more mundane, this revolver and
this knife, and for aid in all, these so small electric lamps,
which you can fasten to your breast, and for all, and above
all at the last, this, which we must not desecrate needless."

This was a portion of Sacred Wafer, which he put in an
envelope and handed to me. Each of the others was similarly
equipped.

"Now," he said, "friend John, where are the skeleton keys?
If so that we can open the door, we need not break house by
the window, as before at Miss Lucy's."

Dr. Seward tried one or two skeleton keys, his mechani-
cal dexterity as a surgeon standing him in good stead. Pre-
sently he got one to suit, after a little play back and
forward the bolt yielded, and with a rusty clang, shot back.
We pressed on the door, the rusty hinges creaked, and it
slowly opened. It was startlingly like the image conveyed to
me in Dr. Seward's diary of the opening of Miss Westenra's
tomb, I fancy that the same idea seemed to strike the others,
for with one accord they shrank back. The Professor was the
first to move forward, and stepped into the open door.

"In manus tuas, Domine!"he said, crossing himself as he
passed over the threshold. We closed the door behind us, lest
when we should have lit our lamps we should possibly attract
attention from the road. The Professor carefully tried the
lock, lest we might not be able to open it from within
should we be in a hurry making our exit. Then we all lit our
lamps and proceeded on our search.

The light from the tiny lamps fell in all sorts of odd
forms, as the rays crossed each other, or the opacity of our
bodies threw great shadows. I could not for my life get away
from the feeling that there was someone else amongst us. I
suppose it was the recollection, so powerfully brought home
to me by the grim surroundings, of that terrible experience
in Transylvania. I think the feeling was common to us all,
for I noticed that the others kept looking over their
shoulders at every sound and every new shadow, just as I felt
myself doing.

The whole place was thick with dust. The floor was seem-
ingly inches deep, except where there were recent footsteps,
in which on holding down my lamp I could see marks of hob-
nails where the dust was cracked. The walls were fluffy and
heavy with dust, and in the corners were masses of spider's
webs, whereon the dust had gathered till they looked like old
tattered rags as the weight had torn them partly down. On a
table in the hall was a great bunch of keys, with a time-
yellowed label on each. They had been used several times, for
on the table were several similar rents in the blanket of
dust, similar to that exposed when the Professor lifted them.

He turned to me and said, "You know this place, Jonathan.
You have copied maps of it, and you know it at least more
than we do. Which is the way to the chapel?"

I had an idea of its direction, though on my former
visit I had not been able to get admission to it, so I led
the way, and after a few wrong turnings found myself opposite
a low, arched oaken door, ribbed with iron bands.

"This is the spot," said the Professor as he turned his
lamp on a small map of the house, copied from the file of my
original correspondence regarding the purchase. With a
little trouble we found the key on the bunch and opened the
door. We were prepared for some unpleasantness, for as we
were opening the door a faint, malodorous air seemed to ex-
hale through the gaps, but none of us ever expected such an
odor as we encountered. None of the others had met the
Count at all at close quarters, and when I had seen him he
was either in the fasting stage of his existence in his
rooms or, when he was bloated with fresh blood, in a ruined
building open to the air, but here the place was small and
close, and the long disuse had made the air stagnant and foul.
There was an earthy smell, as of some dry miasma, which came
through the fouler air. But as to the odor itself, how shall
I describe it? It was not alone that it was composed of all
the ills of mortality and with the pungent, acrid smell of
blood, but it seemed as though corruption had become itself
corrupt. Faugh! It sickens me to think of it. Every breath
exhaled by that monster seemed to have clung to the place
and intensified its loathsomeness.

Under ordinary circumstances such a stench would have
brought our enterprise to an end, but this was no ordinary
case, and the high and terrible purpose in which we were in-
volved gave us a strength which rose above merely physical
considerations. After the involuntary shrinking consequent
on the first nauseous whiff, we one and all set about our
work as though that loathsome place were a garden of roses.

We made an accurate examination of the place, the Pro-
fessor saying as we began, "The first thing is to see how
many of the boxes are left, we must then examine every hole
and corner and cranny and see if we cannot get some clue as
to what has become of the rest."

A glance was sufficient to show how many remained, for
the great earth chests were bulky, and there was no mistaking
them.

There were only twenty-nine left out of the fifty! Once
I got a fright, for, seeing Lord Godalming suddenly turn and
look out of the vaulted door into the dark passage beyond, I
looked too, and for an instant my heart stood still. Some-
where, looking out from the shadow, I seemed to see the high
lights of the Count's evil face, the ridge of the nose, the
red eyes, the red lips, the awful pallor. It was only for a
moment, for, as Lord Godalming said, "I thought I saw a face,
but it was only the shadows," and resumed his inquiry, I
turned my lamp in the direction, and stepped into the passage.
There was no sign of anyone, and as there were no corners, no
doors, no aperture of any kind, but only the solid walls of
the passage, there could be no hiding place even for him. I
took it that fear had helped imagination, and said nothing.

A few minutes later I saw Morris step suddenly back
from a corner, which he was examining. We all followed his
movements with our eyes, for undoubtedly some nervousness was
growing on us, and we saw a whole mass of phosphorescence,
which twinkled like stars. We all instinctively drew back.
The whole place was becoming alive with rats.

For a moment or two we stood appalled, all save Lord
Godalming, who was seemingly prepared for such an emergency.
Rushing over to the great iron-bound oaken door, which Dr.
Seward had described from the outside, and which I had seen
myself, he turned the key in the lock, drew the huge bolts,
and swung the door open. Then, taking his little silver
whistle from his pocket, he blew a low, shrill call. It was
answered from behind Dr. Seward's house by the yelping of
dogs, and after about a minute three terriers came dashing
round the corner of the house. Unconsciously we had all
moved towards the door, and as we moved I noticed that the
dust had been much disturbed. The boxes which had been taken
out had been brought this way. But even in the minute that
had elapsed the number of the rats had vastly increased. They
seemed to swarm over the place all at once, till the lamp-
light, shining on their moving dark bodies and glittering,
baleful eyes, made the place look like a bank of earth set
with fireflies. The dogs dashed on, but at the threshold
suddenly stopped and snarled, and then, simultaneously lifting
their noses, began to howl in most lugubrious fashion. The
rats were multiplying in thousands, and we moved out.

Lord Godalming lifted one of the dogs, and carrying him
in, placed him on the floor. The instant his feet touched the
ground he seemed to recover his courage, and rushed at his
natural enemies. They fled before him so fast that before he
had shaken the life out of a score, the other dogs, who had
by now been lifted in the same manner, had but small prey
ere the whole mass had vanished.

With their going it seemed as if some evil presence had
departed, for the dogs frisked about and barked merrily as
they made sudden darts at their prostrate foes, and turned
them over and over and tossed them in the air with vicious
shakes. We all seemed to find our spirits rise. Whether it
was the purifying of the deadly atmosphere by the opening of
the chapel door, or the relief which we experienced by
finding ourselves in the open I know not, but most certainly
the shadow of dread seemed to slip from us like a robe, and
the occasion of our coming lost something of its grim signi-
ficance, though we did not slacken a whit in our resolution.
We closed the outer door and barred and locked it, and bring-
ing the dogs with us, began our search of the house. We
found nothing throughout except dust in extraordinary pro-
portions, and all untouched save for my own footsteps when I
had made my first visit. Never once did the dogs exhibit
any symptom of uneasiness, and even when we returned to the
chapel they frisked about as though they had been rabbit
hunting in a summer wood.

The morning was quickening in the east when we emerged
from the front. Dr. Van Helsing had taken the key of the
hall door from the bunch, and locked the door in orthodox
fashion, putting the key into his pocket when he had done.

"So far," he said, "our night has been eminently suc-
cessful. No harm has come to us such as I feared might be
and yet we have ascertained how many boxes are missing. More
than all do I rejoice that this, our first, and perhaps our
most difficult and dangerous, step has been accomplished
without the bringing thereinto our most sweet Madam Mina or
troubling her waking or sleeping thoughts with sights and
sounds and smells of horror which she might never forget. One
lesson, too, we have learned, if it be allowable to argue a
particulari, that the brute beasts which are to the Count's
command are yet themselves not amenable to his spiritual
power, for look, these rats that would come to his call, just
as from his castle top he summon the wolves to your going
and to that poor mother's cry, though they come to him, they
run pell-mell from the so little dogs of my friend Arthur. We
have other matters before us, other dangers, other fears, and
that monster. . .He has not used his power over the brute
world for the only or the last time tonight. So be it that
he has gone elsewhere. Good! It has given us opportunity to
cry `check'in some ways in this chess game, which we play for
the stake of human souls. And now let us go home. The dawn
is close at hand, and we have reason to be content with our
first night's work. It may be ordained that we have many
nights and days to follow, if full of peril, but we must go
on, and from no danger shall we shrink."

The house was silent when we got back, save for some
poor creature who was screaming away in one of the distant
wards, and a low, moaning sound from Renfield's room. The
poor wretch was doubtless torturing himself, after the manner
of the insane, with needless thoughts of pain.

I came tiptoe into our own room, and found Mina asleep,
breathing so softly that I had to put my ear down to hear
it. She looks paler than usual. I hope the meeting tonight
has not upset her. I am truly thankful that she is to be
left out of our future work, and even of our deliberations.
It is too great a strain for a woman to bear. I did not think
so at first, but I know better now. Therefore I am glad that
it is settled. There may be things which would frighten her
to hear, and yet to conceal them from her might be worse
than to tell her if once she suspected that there was any
concealment. Henceforth our work is to be a sealed book to
her, till at least such time as we can tell her that all is
finished, and the earth free from a monster of the nether
world. I daresay it will be difficult to begin to keep sil-
ence after such confidence as ours, but I must be resolute,
and tomorrow I shall keep dark over tonight's doings, and
shall refuse to speak of anything that has happened. I rest
on the sofa, so as not to disturb her.


1 October, later.--I suppose it was natural that we
should have all overslept ourselves, for the day was a busy
one, and the night had no rest at all. Even Mina must have
felt its exhaustion, for though I slept till the sun was high,
I was awake before her, and had to call two or three times
before she awoke. Indeed, she was so sound asleep that for
a few seconds she did not recognize me, but looked at me
with a sort of blank terror, as one looks who has been waked
out of a bad dream. She complained a little of being tired,
and I let her rest till later in the day. We now know of
twenty-one boxes having been removed, and if it be that
several were taken in any of these removals we may be able
to trace them all. Such will, of course, immensely simplify
our labor, and the sooner the matter is attended to the
better. I shall look up Thomas Snelling today.

DR. SEWARD'S DIARY


1 October.--It was towards noon when I was awakened by
the Professor walking into my room. He was more jolly and
cheerful than usual, and it is quite evident that last
night's work has helped to take some of the brooding weight
off his mind.

After going over the adventure of the night he suddenly
said, "Your patient interests me much. May it be that with
you I visit him this morning? Or if that you are too occupy,
I can go alone if it may be. It is a new experience to me to
find a lunatic who talk philosophy, and reason so sound."

I had some work to do which pressed, so I told him that
if he would go alone I would be glad, as then I should not
have to keep him waiting, so I called an attendant and gave
him the necessary instructions. Before the Professor left
the room I cautioned him against getting any false impress-
ion from my patient.

"But," he answered, "I want him to talk of himself and
of his delusion as to consuming live things. He said to
Madam Mina, as I see in your diary of yesterday, that he had
once had such a belief. Why do you smile, friend John?"

"Excuse me," I said, "but the answer is here." I laid
my hand on the typewritten matter."When our sane and learned
lunatic made that very statement of how he used to consume
life, his mouth was actually nauseous with the flies and
spiders which he had eaten just before Mrs. Harker entered
the room."

Van Helsing smiled in turn. "Good!" he said. "Your
memory is true, friend John. I should have remembered. And
yet it is this very obliquity of thought and memory which
makes mental disease such a fascinating study. Perhaps I may
gain more knowledge out of the folly of this madman than I
shall from the teaching of the most wise. Who knows?"

I went on with my work, and before long was through that
in hand. It seemed that the time had been very short indeed,
but there was Van Helsing back in the study.

"Do I interrupt?" he asked politely as he stood at the
door.

"Not at all," I answered. "Come in. My work is finished,
and I am free. I can go with you now, if you like."

"It is needless, I have seen him!"

"Well?"

"I fear that he does not appraise me at much. Our inter-
view was short. When I entered his room he was sitting on
a stool in the center, with his elbows on his knees, and his
face was the picture of sullen discontent. I spoke to him
as cheerfully as I could, and with such a measure of respect
as I could assume. He made no reply whatever. 'Don't you
know me?' I asked. His answer was not reassuring. "I know
you well enough, you are the old fool Van Helsing. I wish
you would take yourself and your idiotic brain theories
somewhere else. Damn all thick-headed Dutchmen!' Not a
word more would he say, but sat in his implacable sullenness
as indifferent to me as though I had not been in the room
at all. Thus departed for this time my chance of much learn-
ing from this so clever lunatic, so I shall go, if I may,
and cheer myself with a few happy words with that sweet
soul Madam Mina. Friend John, it does rejoice me unspeakable
that she is no more to be pained, no more to be worried
with our terrible things. Though we shall much miss her
help, it is better so."

"I agree with you with all my heart," I answered ear-
nestly, for I did not want him to weaken in this matter.
"Mrs. Harker is better out of it. Things are quite bad
enough for us, all men of the world, and who have been in
many tight places in our time, but it is no place for a
woman, and if she had remained in touch with the affair,
it would in time infallibly have wrecked her."

So Van Helsing has gone to confer with Mrs. Harker
and Harker, Quincey and Art are all out following up the
clues as to the earth boxes. I shall finish my round of
work and we shall meet tonight.





MINA HARKER'S JOURNAL


1 October.--It is strange to me to be kept in the dark
as I am today, after Jonathan's full confidence for so many
years, to see him manifestly avoid certain matters, and those
the most vital of all. This morning I slept late after the
fatigues of yesterday, and though Jonathan was late too, he
was the earlier. He spoke to me before he went out, never
more sweetly or tenderly, but he never mentioned a word of
what had happened in the visit to the Count's house. And yet
he must have known how terribly anxious I was. Poor dear
fellow! I suppose it must have distressed him even more than
it did me. They all agreed that it was best that I should
not be drawn further into this awful work, and I acquiesced.
But to think that he keeps anything from me! And now I am
crying like a silly fool, when I know it comes from my hus-
band's great love and from the good, good wishes of those
other strong men.

That has done me good. Well, some day Jonathan will
tell me all. And lest it should ever be that he should
think for a moment that I kept anything from him, I still
keep my journal as usual. Then if he has feared of my trust
I shall show it to him, with every thought of my heart put
down for his dear eyes to read. I feel strangely sad and
low-spirited today. I suppose it is the reaction from the
terrible excitement.

Last night I went to bed when the men had gone, simply
because they told me to. I didn't feel sleepy, and I did
feel full of devouring anxiety. I kept thinking over every-
thing that has been ever since Jonathan came to see me in
London, and it all seems like a horrible tragedy, with fate
pressing on relentlessly to some destined end. Everything
that one does seems, no matter how right it me be, to bring
on the very thing which is most to be deplored. If I hadn't
gone to Whitby, perhaps poor dear Lucy would be with us now.
She hadn't taken to visiting the churchyard till I came, and
if she hadn't come there in the day time with me she
wouldn't have walked in her sleep. And if she hadn't gone
there at night and asleep, that monster couldn't have des-
troyed her as he did. Oh, why did I ever go to Whitby? There
now, crying again! I wonder what has come over me today. I
must hide it from Jonathan, for if he knew that I had been
crying twice in one morning. . .I, who never cried on my
own account, and whom he has never caused to shed a tear, the
dear fellow would fret his heart out. I shall put a bold face
on, and if I do feel weepy, he shall never see it. I suppose
it is just one of the lessons that we poor women have to
learn. . .

I can't quite remember how I fell asleep last night. I
remember hearing the sudden barking of the dogs and a lot of
queer sounds, like praying on a very tumultuous scale, from
Mr. Renfield's room, which is somewhere under this. And then
there was silence over everything, silence so profound that
it startled me, and I got up and looked out of the window.  All
was dark and silent, the black shadows thrown by the moon-
light seeming full of a silent mystery of their own. Not a
thing seemed to be stirring, but all to be grim and fixed as
death or fate, so that a thin streak of white mist, that crept
with almost imperceptible slowness across the grass towards
the house, seemed to have a sentience and a vitality of its
own. I think that the digression of my thoughts must have
done me good, for when I got back to bed I found a lethargy
creeping over me. I lay a while, but could not quite sleep,
so I got out and looked out of the window again. The mist
was spreading, and was now close up to the house, so that I
could see it lying thick against the wall, as though it were
stealing up to the windows. The poor man was more loud than
ever, and though I could not distinguish a word he said, I
could in some way recognize in his tones some passionate en-
treaty on his part. Then there was the sound of a struggle,
and I knew that the attendants were dealing with him. I was
so frightened that I crept into bed, and pulled the clothes
over my head, putting my fingers in my ears. I was not then
a bit sleepy, at least so I thought, but I must have fallen
asleep, for except dreams, I do not remember anything until
the morning, when Jonathan woke me. I think that it took me
an effort and a little time to realize where I was, and that
it was Jonathan who was bending over me. My dream was very
peculiar, and was almost typical of the way that waking
thoughts become merged in, or continued in, dreams.

I thought that I was asleep, and waiting for Jonathan to
come back. I was very anxious about him, and I was powerless
to act, my feet, and my hands, and my brain were weighted, so
that nothing could proceed at the usual pace. And so I slept
uneasily and thought. Then it began to dawn upon me that the
air was heavy, and dank, and cold. I put back the clothes
from my face, and found, to my surprise, that all was dim
around. The gaslight which I had left lit for Jonathan, but
turned down, came only like a tiny red spark through the fog,
which had evidently grown thicker and poured into the room.
Then it occurred to me that I had shut the window before I
had come to bed. I would have got out to make certain on the
point, but some leaden lethargy seemed to chain my limbs and
even my will. I lay still and endured, that was all. I closed
my eyes, but could still see through my eyelids. (It is won-
derful what tricks our dreams play us, and how conveniently
we can imagine.) The mist grew thicker and thicker and I
could see now how it came in, for I could see it like smoke,
or with the white energy of boiling water, pouring in, not
through the window, but through the joinings of the door. It
got thicker and thicker, till it seemed as if it became con-
centrated into a sort of pillar of cloud in the room, through
the top of which I could see the light of the gas shining
like a red eye. Things began to whirl through my brain just
as the cloudy column was now whirling in the room, and
through it all came the scriptural words "a pillar of cloud
by day and of fire by night." Was it indeed such spiritual
guidance that was coming to me in my sleep? But the pillar
was composed of both the day and the night guiding, for the
fire was in the red eye, which at the thought gat a new fas-
cination for me, till, as I looked, the fire divided, and
seemed to shine on me through the fog like two red eyes, such
as Lucy told me of in her momentary mental wandering when, on
the cliff, the dying sunlight struck the windows of St. Mary's
Church. Suddenly the horror burst upon me that it was thus
that Jonathan had seen those awful women growing into real-
ity through the whirling mist in the moonlight, and in my
dream I must have fainted, for all became black darkness. The
last conscious effort which imagination made was to show me
a livid white face bending over me out of the mist.

I must be careful of such dreams, for they would unseat
one's reason if there were too much of them. I would get
Dr. Van Helsing or Dr. Seward to prescribe something for me
which would make me sleep, only that I fear to alarm them.
Such a dream at the present time would become woven into
their fears for me. Tonight I shall strive hard to sleep
naturally. If I do not, I shall tomorrow night get them to
give me a dose of chloral, that cannot hurt me for once, and
it will give me a good night's sleep. Last night tired me
more than if I had not slept at all.


2 October 10 P.M.--Last night I slept, but did not
dream. I must have slept soundly, for I was not waked by
Jonathan coming to bed, but the sleep has not refreshed me,
for today I feel terribly weak and spiritless. I spent all
yesterday trying to read, or lying down dozing. In the after-
noon, Mr. Renfield asked if he might see me. Poor man, he was
very gentle, and when I came away he kissed my hand and bade
God bless me. Some way it affected me much. I am crying when
I think of him. This is a new weakness, of which I must be
careful. Jonathan would be miserable if he knew I had been
crying. He and the others were out till dinner time, and they
all came in tired. I did what I could to brighten them up,
and I suppose that the effort did me good, for I forgot how
tired I was. After dinner they sent me to bed, and all went
off to smoke together, as they said, but I knew that they
wanted to tell each other of what had occurred to each
during the day. I could see from Jonathan's manner that he
had something important to communicate. I was not so sleepy
as I should have been, so before they went I asked Dr. Seward
to give me a little opiate of some kind, as I had not slept
well the night before. He very kindly made me up a sleeping
draught, which he gave to me, telling me that it would do me
no harm, as it was very mild. . .I have taken it, and am
waiting for sleep, which still keeps aloof. I hope I have not
done wrong, for as sleep begins to flirt with me, a new fear
comes, that I may have been foolish in thus depriving myself
of the power of waking. I might want it. Here comes sleep.
Goodnight.





CHAPTER 20


JONATHAN HARKER'S JOURNAL


1 October, evening.--I found Thomas Snelling in his
house at Bethnal Green, but unhappily he was not in a condi-
tion to remember anything. The very prospect of beer which
my expected coming had opened to him had proved too much, and
he had begun too early on his expected debauch. I learned,
however, from his wife, who seemed a decent, poor soul, that
he was only the assistant of Smollet, who of the two mates
was the responsible person. So off I drove to Walworth, and
found Mr. Joseph Smollet at home and in his shirtsleeves,
taking a late tea out of a saucer. He is a decent, intell-
igent fellow, distinctly a good, reliable type of workman,
and with a headpiece of his own. He remembered all about the
incident of the boxes, and from a wonderful dog-eared note-
book, which he produced from some mysterious receptacle about
the seat of his trousers, and which had hieroglyphical
entries in thick, half-obliterated pencil, he gave me the
destinations of the boxes. There were, he said, six in the
cartload which he took from Carfax and left at 197 Chicksand
Street, Mile End New Town, and another six which he deposited
at Jamaica Lane, Bermondsey. If then the Count meant to
scatter these ghastly refuges of his over London, these
places were chosen as the first of delivery, so that later he
might distribute more fully. The systematic manner in which
this was done made me think that he could not mean to con-
fine himself to two sides of London. He was now fixed on the
far east on the northern shore, on the east of the southern
shore, and on the south. The north and west were surely never
meant to be left out of his diabolical scheme, let alone the
City itself and the very heart of fashionable London in the
south-west and west. I went back to Smollet, and asked him if
he could tell us if any other boxes had been taken from
Carfax.

He replied, "Well guv'nor, you've treated me very
'an'some", I had given him half a sovereign, "an I'll tell
yer all I know. I heard a man by the name of Bloxam say four
nights ago in the 'Are an' 'Ounds, in Pincher's Alley, as
'ow he an' his mate 'ad 'ad a rare dusty job in a old 'ouse
at Purfleet. There ain't a many such jobs as this 'ere, an'
I'm thinkin' that maybe Sam Bloxam could tell ye summut."

I asked if he could tell me where to find him. I told
him that if he could get me the address it would be worth
another half sovereign to him. So he gulped down the rest
of his tea and stood up, saying that he was going to begin
the search then and there.

At the door he stopped, and said, "Look 'ere, guv'nor,
there ain't no sense in me a keepin' you 'ere. I may find
Sam soon, or I mayn't, but anyhow he ain't like to be in a
way to tell ye much tonight. Sam is a rare one when he starts
on the booze. If you can give me a envelope with a stamp on
it, and put yer address on it, I'll find out where Sam is to
be found and post it ye tonight. But ye'd better be up arter
'im soon in the mornin', never mind the booze the night
afore."

This was all practical, so one of the children went off
with a penny to buy an envelope and a sheet of paper, and to
keep the change. When she came back, I addressed the envelope
and stamped it, and when Smollet had again faithfully pro-
mised to post the address when found, I took my way to home.
We're on the track anyhow. I am tired tonight, and I want to
sleep. Mina is fast asleep, and looks a little too pale. Her
eyes look as though she had been crying. Poor dear, I've no
doubt it frets her to be kept in the dark, and it may make
her doubly anxious about me and the others. But it is best
as it is. It is better to be disappointed and worried in such
a way now than to have her nerve broken. The doctors were
quite right to insist on her being kept out of this dreadful
business. I must be firm, for on me this particular burden
of silence must rest. I shall not ever enter on the subject
with her under any circumstances. Indeed, It may not be a hard
task, after all, for she herself has become reticent on the
subject, and has not spoken of the Count or his doings ever
since we told her of our decision.


2 October, evening--A long and trying and exciting day.
By the first post I got my directed envelope with a dirty
scrap of paper enclosed, on which was written with a carpen-
ter's pencil in a sprawling hand, "Sam Bloxam, Korkrans, 4
Poters Cort, Bartel Street, Walworth. Arsk for the depite."

I got the letter in bed, and rose without waking Mina.
She looked heavy and sleepy and pale, and far from well. I
determined not to wake her, but that when I should return
from this new search, I would arrange for her going back to
Exeter. I think she would be happier in our own home, with
her daily tasks to interest her, than in being here amongst
us and in ignorance. I only saw Dr. Seward for a moment,
and told him where I was off to, promising to come back and
tell the rest so soon as I should have found out anything. I
drove to Walworth and found, with some difficulty, Potter's
Court. Mr. Smollet's spelling misled me, as I asked for
Poter's Court instead of Potter's Court. However, when I
had found the court, I had no difficulty in discovering Cor-
coran's lodging house.

When I asked the man who came to the door for the
"depite," he shook his head, and said, "I dunno 'im. There
ain't no such a person 'ere. I never 'eard of 'im in all my
bloomin' days. Don't believe there ain't nobody of that kind
livin' 'ere or anywheres."

I took out Smollet's letter, and as I read it it seemed
to me that the lesson of the spelling of the name of the
court might guide me. "What are you?" I asked.

"I'm the depity," he answered.

I saw at once that I was on the right track. Phonetic
spelling had again misled me. A half crown tip put the
deputy's knowledge at my disposal, and I learned that Mr.
Bloxam, who had slept off the remains of his beer on the
previous night at Corcoran's, had left for his work at Poplar
at five o'clock that morning. He could not tell me where the
place of work was situated, but he had a vague idea that it
was some kind of a "new-fangled ware'us," and with this
slender clue I had to start for Poplar. It was twelve o'clock
before I got any satisfactory hint of such a building, and
this I got at a coffee shop, where some workmen were having
their dinner. One of them suggested that there was being
erected at Cross Angel Street a new "cold storage" building,
and as this suited the condition of a "new-fangled ware'us,"
I at once drove to it. An interview with a surly gatekeeper
and a surlier foreman, both of whom were appeased with the
coin of the realm, put me on the track of Bloxam. He was
sent for on my suggestion that I was willing to pay his days
wages to his foreman for the privilege of asking him a few
questions on a private matter. He was a smart enough fellow,
though rough of speech and bearing. When I had promised to
pay for his information and given him an earnest, he told me
that he had made two journeys between Carfax and a house in
Piccadilly, and had taken from this house to the latter nine
great boxes, "main heavy ones," with a horse and cart hired
by him for this purpose.

I asked him if he could tell me the number of the
house in Piccadilly, to which he replied, "Well, guv'nor, I
forgits the number, but it was only a few door from a big
white church, or somethink of the kind, not long built. It
was a dusty old 'ouse, too, though nothin' to the dustiness
of the 'ouse we tooked the bloomin' boxes from."

"How did you get in if both houses were empty?"

"There was the old party what engaged me a waitin' in
the 'ouse at Purfleet. He 'elped me to lift the boxes and
put them in the dray. Curse me, but he was the strongest
chap I ever struck, an' him a old feller, with a white mous-
tache, one that thin you would think he couldn't throw a
shadder."

How this phrase thrilled through me!

"Why, 'e took up 'is end o' the boxes like they was
pounds of tea, and me a puffin' an' a blowin' afore I could
upend mine anyhow, an' I'm no chicken, neither."

"How did you get into the house in Piccadilly?" I asked.

"He was there too. He must 'a started off and got there
afore me, for when I rung of the bell he kem an' opened the
door 'isself an' 'elped me carry the boxes into the 'all."

"The whole nine?" I asked.

"Yus, there was five in the first load an' four in the
second. It was main dry work, an' I don't so well remember
'ow I got 'ome."

I interrupted him, "Were the boxes left in the hall?"

"Yus, it was a big 'all, an' there was nothin' else in
it."

I made one more attempt to further matters. "You didn't
have any key?"

"Never used no key nor nothink. The old gent, he opened
the door 'isself an' shut it again when I druv off. I don't
remember the last time, but that was the beer."

"And you can't remember the number of the house?"

"No, sir. But ye needn't have no difficulty about that.
It's a 'igh 'un with a stone front with a bow on it, an'
'igh steps up to the door. I know them steps, 'avin' 'ad to
carry the boxes up with three loafers what come round to
earn a copper. The old gent give them shillin's, an' they
seein' they got so much, they wanted more. But 'e took one
of them by the shoulder and was like to throw 'im down the
steps, till the lot of them went away cussin'."

I thought that with this description I could find the
house, so having paid my friend for his information, I start-
ed off for Piccadilly. I had gained a new painful experience.
The Count could, it was evident, handle the earth boxes him-
self. If so, time was precious, for now that he had achieved
a certain amount of distribution, he could, by choosing his
own time, complete the task unobserved. At Piccadilly Circus
I discharged my cab, and walked westward. Beyond the Junior
Constitutional I came across the house described and was sat-
isfied that this was the next of the lairs arranged by
Dracula. The house looked as though it had been long unten-
anted. The windows were encrusted with dust, and the
shutters were up. All the framework was black with time, and
from the iron the paint had mostly scaled away. It was evi-
dent that up to lately there had been a large notice board
in front of the balcony. It had, however, been roughly torn
away, the uprights which had supported it still remaining.
Behind the rails of the balcony I saw there were some loose
boards, whose raw edges looked white. I would have given a
good deal to have been able to see the notice board intact,
as it would, perhaps, have given some clue to the ownership
of the house. I remembered my experience of the investiga-
tion and purchase of Carfax, and I could not but feel that I
could find the former owner there might be some means disco-
vered of gaining access to the house.

There was at present nothing to be learned from the
Piccadilly side, and nothing could be done, so I went around
to the back to see if anything could be gathered from this
quarter. The mews were active, the Piccadilly houses being
mostly in occupation. I asked one or two of the grooms and
helpers whom I saw around if they could tell me anything
about the empty house. One of them said that he heard it had
lately been taken, but he couldn't say from whom. He told me,
however, that up to very lately there had been a notice board
of "For Sale" up, and that perhaps Mitchell, Sons, & Candy
the house agents could tell me something, as he thought he
remembered seeing the name of that firm on the board. I did
not wish to seem too eager, or to let my informant know or
guess too much, so thanking him in the usual manner, I strol-
led away. It was now growing dusk, and the autumn night was
closing in, so I did not lose any time. Having learned the
address of Mitchell, Sons, & Candy from a directory at the
Berkeley, I was soon at their office in Sackville Street.

The gentleman who saw me was particularly suave in man-
ner, but uncommunicative in equal proportion. Having once
told me that the Piccadilly house, which throughout our in-
terview he called a "mansion," was sold, he considered my
business as concluded. When I asked who had purchased it, he
opened his eyes a thought wider, and paused a few seconds
before replying, "It is sold, sir."

"Pardon me," I said, with equal politeness, "but I have
a special reason for wishing to know who purchased it."

Again he paused longer, and raised his eyebrows still
more. "It is sold, sir," was again his laconic reply.

"Surely," I said, "you do not mind letting me know so
much."

"But I do mind," he answered. "The affairs of their
clients are absolutely safe in the hands of Mitchell, Sons,
& Candy."

This was manifestly a prig of the first water, and there
was no use arguing with him. I thought I had best meet him
on his own ground, so I said, "Your clients, sir, are happy
in having so resolute a guardian of their confidence. I am
myself a professional man."

Here I handed him my card. "In this instance I am not
prompted by curiosity, I act on the part of Lord Godalming,
who wishes to know something of the property which was, he
understood, lately for sale."

These words put a different complexion on affairs. He
said, "I would like to oblige you if I could, Mr. Harker,
and especially would I like to oblige his lordship. We once
carried out a small matter of renting some chambers for him
when he was the Honorable Arthur Holmwood. If you will let
me have his lordship's address I will consult the House on
the subject, and will, in any case, communicate with his
lordship by tonight's post. It will be a pleasure if we can
so far deviate from our rules as to give the required infor-
mation to his lordship."

I wanted to secure a friend, and not to make an enemy,
so I thanked him, gave the address at Dr. Seward's and came
away. It was now dark, and I was tired and hungry. I got
a cup of tea at the Aerated Bread Company and came down to
Purfleet by the next train.

I found all the others at home. Mina was looking tired
and pale, but she made a gallant effort to be bright and
cheerful. It wrung my heart to think that I had had to keep
anything from her and so caused her inquietude. Thank God,
this will be the last night of her looking on at our con-
ferences, and feeling the sting of our not showing our con-
fidence. It took all my courage to hold to the wise reso-
lution of keeping her out of our grim task. She seems some-
how more reconciled, or else the very subject seems to have
become repugnant to her, for when any accidental allusion is
made she actually shudders. I am glad we made our resolution
in time, as with such a feeling as this, our growing knowledge
would be torture to her.

I could not tell the others of the day's discovery till
we were alone, so after dinner, followed by a little music
to save appearances even amongst ourselves, I took Mina to
her room and left her to go to bed. The dear girl was more
affectionate with me than ever, and clung to me as though she
would detain me, but there was much to be talked of and I
came away. Thank God, the ceasing of telling things has made
no difference between us.

When I came down again I found the others all gathered
round the fire in the study. In the train I had written my
diary so far, and simply read it off to them as the best
means of letting them get abreast of my own information.

When I had finished Van Helsing said, "This has been a
great day's work, friend Jonathan. Doubtless we are on the
track of the missing boxes. If we find them all in that
house, then our work is near the end. But if there be some
missing, we must search until we find them. Then shall we
make our final coup, and hunt the wretch to his real death."

We all sat silent awhile and all at once Mr. Morris
spoke, "Say! How are we going to get into that house?"

"We got into the other," answered Lord Godalming quickly.

"But, Art, this is different. We broke house at Carfax,
but we had night and a walled park to protect us. It will be
a mighty different thing to commit burglary in Piccadilly,
either by day or night. I confess I don't see how we are
going to get in unless that agency duck can find us a key of
some sort."

Lord Godalming's brows contracted, and he stood up and
walked about the room.  By-and-by he stopped and said, turning
from one to another of us, "Quincey's head is level. This
burglary business is getting serious. We got off once all
right, but we have now a rare job on hand. Unless we can
find the Count's key basket."

As nothing could well be done before morning, and as it
would be at least advisable to wait till Lord Godalming
should hear from Mitchell's, we decided not to take any ac-
tive step before breakfast time. For a good while we sat
and smoked, discussing the matter in its various lights and
bearings. I took the opportunity of bringing this diary
right up to the moment. I am very sleepy and shall go to
bed. . .

Just a line. Mina sleeps soundly and her breathing is
regular. Her forehead is puckered up into little wrinkles,
as though she thinks even in her sleep. She is still too
pale, but does not look so haggard as she did this morning.
Tomorrow will, I hope, mend all this. She will be herself
at home in Exeter. Oh, but I am sleepy!




DR. SEWARD'S DIARY


1 October.--I am puzzled afresh about Renfield. His
moods change so rapidly that I find it difficult to keep
touch of them, and as they always mean something more than
his own well-being, they form a more than interesting study.
This morning, when I went to see him after his repulse of
Van Helsing, his manner was that of a man commanding destiny.
He was, in fact, commanding destiny, subjectively. He did not
really care for any of the things of mere earth, he was in
the clouds and looked down on all the weaknesses and wants
of us poor mortals.

I thought I would improve the occasion and learn some-
thing, so I asked him, "What about the flies these times?"

He smiled on me in quite a superior sort of way, such
a smile as would have become the face of Malvolio, as he
answered me, "The fly, my dear sir, has one striking feature.
It's wings are typical of the aerial powers of the psychic
faculties. The ancients did well when they typified the soul
as a butterfly!"

I thought I would push his analogy to its utmost logi-
cally, so I said quickly, "Oh, it is a soul you are after
now, is it?"

His madness foiled his reason, and a puzzled look spread
over his face as, shaking his head with a decision which I
had but seldom seen in him.

He said, "Oh, no, oh no! I want no souls. Life is all
I want." Here he brightened up. "I am pretty indifferent
about it at present. Life is all right. I have all I want.
You must get a new patient, doctor, if you wish to study
zoophagy!"

This puzzled me a little, so I drew him on. "Then you
command life. You are a god, I suppose?"

He smiled with an ineffably benign superiority. "Oh no!
Far be it from me to arrogate to myself the attributes of
the Deity. I am not even concerned in His especially spirit-
ual doings. If I may state my intellectual position I am,
so far as concerns things purely terrestrial, somewhat in the
position which Enoch occupied spiritually!"

This was a poser to me. I could not at the moment recall
Enoch's appositeness, so I had to ask a simple question,
though I felt that by so doing I was lowering myself in the
eyes of the lunatic. "And why with Enoch?"

"Because he walked with God."

I could not see the analogy, but did not like to admit
it, so I harked back to what he had denied. "So you don't
care about life and you don't want souls. Why not?" I put
my question quickly and somewhat sternly, on purpose to dis-
concert him.

The effort succeeded, for an instant he unconsciously
relapsed into his old servile manner, bent low before me,
and actually fawned upon me as he replied. "I don't want
any souls, indeed, indeed! I don't. I couldn't use them if
I had them. They would be no manner of use to me. I couldn't
eat them or. . ."

He suddenly stopped and the old cunning look spread
over his face, like a wind sweep on the surface of the water.

"And doctor, as to life, what is it after all? When
you've got all you require, and you know that you will never
want, that is all. I have friends, good friends, like you,
Dr. Seward."This was said with a leer of inexpressible cunn-
ing. "I know that I shall never lack the means of life!"

I think that through the cloudiness of his insanity he
saw some antagonism in me, for he at once fell back on the
last refuge of such as he, a dogged silence. After a short
time I saw that for the present it was useless to speak to
him. He was sulky, and so I came away.

Later in the day he sent for me. Ordinarily I would
not have come without special reason, but just at present
I am so interested in him that I would gladly make an effort.
Besides, I am glad to have anything to help pass the time.
Harker is out, following up clues, and so are Lord Godalming
and Quincey. Van Helsing sits in my study poring over the
record prepared by the Harkers. He seems to think that by
accurate knowledge of all details he will light up on some
clue. He does not wish to be disturbed in the work, without
cause. I would have taken him with me to see the patient,
only I thought that after his last repulse he might not care
to go again. There was also another reason. Renfield might
not speak so freely before a third person as when he and I
were alone.

I found him sitting in the middle of the floor on his
stool, a pose which is generally indicative of some mental
energy on his part. When I came in, he said at once, as
though the question had been waiting on his lips. "What
about souls?"

It was evident then that my surmise had been correct.
Unconscious cerebration was doing its work, even with the
lunatic. I determined to have the matter out.

"What about them yourself?" I asked.

He did not reply for a moment but looked all around him,
and up and down, as though he expected to find some inspira-
tion for an answer.

"I don't want any souls!" He said in a feeble, apolo-
getic way. The matter seemed preying on his mind, and so I
determined to use it, to "be cruel only to be kind." So I
said, "You like life, and you want life?"

"Oh yes! But that is all right. You needn't worry about
that!"

"But," I asked, "how are we to get the life without get-
ting the soul also?"

This seemed to puzzle him, so I followed it up, "A nice
time you'll have some time when you're flying out here, with
the souls of thousands of flies and spiders and birds and
cats buzzing and twittering and moaning all around you.
You've got their lives, you know, and you must put up with
their souls!"

Something seemed to affect his imagination, for he put
his fingers to his ears and shut his eyes, screwing them up
tightly just as a small boy does when his face is being
soaped. There was something pathetic in it that touched me.
It also gave me a lesson, for it seemed that before me was a
child, only a child, though the features were worn, and the
stubble on the jaws was white. It was evident that he was
undergoing some process of mental disturbance, and knowing
how his past moods had interpreted things seemingly foreign
to himself, I thought I would enter into his mind as well as
I could and go with him

The first step was to restore confidence, so I asked
him, speaking pretty loud so that he would hear me through
his closed ears, "Would you like some sugar to get your flies
around again?"

He seemed to wake up all at once, and shook his head.
With a laugh he replied, "Not much! Flies are poor things,
after all!" After a pause he added, "But I don't want their
souls buzzing round me, all the same."

"Or spiders?" I went on.

"Blow spiders! What's the use of spiders? There isn't
anything in them to eat or. . ." He stopped suddenly as
though reminded of a forbidden topic.

"So, so!" I thought to myself, "this is the second time
he has suddenly stopped at the word `drink'. What does it
mean?"

Renfield seemed himself aware of having made a lapse,
for he hurried on, as though to distract my attention from
it, "I don't take any stock at all in such matters. `Rats
and mice and such small deer,' as Shakespeare has it,
`chicken feed of the larder' they might be called. I'm past
all that sort of nonsense. You might as well ask a man to
eat molecules with a pair of chopsticks, as to try to inter-
est me about the less carnivora, when I know of what is
before me."

"I see," I said."You want big things that you can make
your teeth meet in? How would you like to breakfast on an
elephant?"

"What ridiculous nonsense you are talking?" He was
getting too wide awake, so I thought I would press him hard.

"I wonder," I said reflectively, "what an elephant's
soul is like!"

The effect I desired was obtained, for he at once fell
from his high-horse and became a child again.

"I don't want an elephant's soul, or any soul at all!"
he said. For a few moments he sat despondently. Suddenly
he jumped to his feet, with his eyes blazing and all the
signs of intense cerebral excitement. "To hell with you and
your souls!" he shouted. "Why do you plague me about souls?
Haven't I got enough to worry, and pain, to distract me al-
ready, without thinking of souls?"

He looked so hostile that I thought he was in for anot-
her homicidal fit, so I blew my whistle.

The instant, however, that I did so he became calm, and
said apologetically, "Forgive me, Doctor. I forgot myself.
You do not need any help. I am so worried in my mind that I
am apt to be irritable. If you only knew the problem I have
to face, and that I am working out, you would pity, and tol-
erate, and pardon me. Pray do not put me in a strait waist-
coat. I want to think and I cannot think freely when my body
is confined. I am sure you will understand!"

He had evidently self-control, so when the attendants
came I told them not to mind, and they withdrew. Renfield
watched them go. When the door was closed he said with con-
siderable dignity and sweetness, "Dr. Seward, you have been
very considerate towards me. Believe me that I am very, very
grateful to you!"

I thought it well to leave him in this mood, and so I
came away. There is certainly something to ponder over in
this man's state. Several points seem to make what the
American interviewer calls "a story," if one could only get
them in proper order. Here they are:

Will not mention "drinking."

Fears the thought of being burdened with the "soul" of
anything.

Has no dread of wanting "life" in the future.

Despises the meaner forms of life altogether, though he
dreads being haunted by their souls.

Logically all these things point one way! He has assu-
rance of some kind that he will acquire some higher life.

He dreads the consequence, the burden of a soul. Then it
is a human life he looks to!

And the assurance. . .?

Merciful God! The Count has been to him, and there is
some new scheme of terror afoot!


Later.--I went after my round to Van Helsing and told
him my suspicion. He grew very grave, and after thinking the
matter over for a while asked me to take him to Renfield. I
did so. As we came to the door we heard the lunatic within
singing gaily, as he used to do in the time which now seems
so long ago.

When we entered we saw with amazement that he had
spread out his sugar as of old. The flies, lethargic with
the autumn, were beginning to buzz into the room. We tried
to make him talk of the subject of our previous conversation,
but he would not attend. He went on with his singing, just
as though we had not been present. He had got a scrap of
paper and was folding it into a notebook. We had to come
away as ignorant as we went in.

His is a curious case indeed. We must watch him tonight.





LETTER, MITCHELL, SONS & CANDY TO LORD GODALMING.


"1 October.

"My Lord,

"We are at all times only too happy to meet your wishes.
We beg, with regard to the desire of your Lordship, expressed
by Mr. Harker on your behalf, to supply the following infor-
mation concerning the sale and purchase of No. 347, Piccadilly.
The original vendors are the executors of the late Mr. Arch-
ibald Winter-Suffield. The purchaser is a foreign nobleman,
Count de Ville, who effected the purchase himself paying the
purchase money in notes `over the counter,' if your Lordship
will pardon us using so vulgar an expression. Beyond this we
know nothing whatever of him.

"We are, my Lord,

"Your Lordship's humble servants,

"MITCHELL, SONS & CANDY."




DR. SEWARD'S DIARY


2 October.--I placed a man in the corridor last night,
and told him to make an accurate note of any sound he might
hear from Renfield's room, and gave him instructions that
if there should be anything strange he was to call me. After
dinner, when we had all gathered round the fire in the study,
Mrs. Harker having gone to bed, we discussed the attempts and
discoveries of the day. Harker was the only one who had any
result, and we are in great hopes that his clue may be an
important one.

Before going to bed I went round to the patient's room
and looked in through the observation trap. He was sleeping
soundly, his heart rose and fell with regular respiration.

This morning the man on duty reported to me that a
little after midnight he was restless and kept saying his
prayers somewhat loudly. I asked him if that was all. He
replied that it was all he heard. There was something about
his manner, so suspicious that I asked him point blank if he
had been asleep. He denied sleep, but admitted to having
"dozed" for a while. It is too bad that men cannot be trusted
unless they are watched.

Today Harker is out following up his clue, and Art and
Quincey are looking after horses. Godalming thinks that it
will be well to have horses always in readiness, for when
we get the information which we seek there will be no time
to lose. We must sterilize all the imported earth between
sunrise and sunset. We shall thus catch the Count at his
weakest, and without a refuge to fly to. Van Helsing is off
to the British Museum looking up some authorities on ancient
medicine. The old physicians took account of things which
their followers do not accept, and the Professor is searching
for witch and demon cures which may be useful to us later.

I sometimes think we must be all mad and that we shall
wake to sanity in strait waistcoats.

Later.--We have met again. We seem at last to be on the track,
and our work of tomorrow may be the beginning of the end. I
wonder if Renfield's quiet has anything to do with this. His
moods have so followed the doings of the Count, that the
coming destruction of the monster may be carried to him some
subtle way. If we could only get some hint as to what passed
in his mind, between the time of my argument with him today
and his resumption of fly-catching, it might afford us a
valuable clue. He is now seemingly quiet for a spell. . .
Is he? That wild yell seemed to come from his room. . .

The attendant came bursting into my room and told me
that Renfield had somehow met with some accident. He had
heard him yell, and when he went to him found him lying on
his face on the floor, all covered with blood. I must go at
once. . .





CHAPTER 21


DR. SEWARD'S DIARY


3 October.--Let me put down with exactness all that
happened, as well as I can remember, since last I made an
entry. Not a detail that I can recall must be forgotten. In
all calmness I must proceed.

When I came to Renfield's room I found him lying on the
floor on his left side in a glittering pool of blood. When I
went to move him, it became at once apparent that he had re-
ceived some terrible injuries. There seemed none of the unity
of purpose between the parts of the body which marks even
lethargic sanity. As the face was exposed I could see that
it was horribly bruised, as though it had been beaten against
the floor. Indeed it was from the face wounds that the pool
of blood originated.

The attendant who was kneeling beside the body said to
me as we turned him over, "I think, sir, his back is broken.
See, both his right arm and leg and the whole side of his
face are paralysed." How such a thing could have happened
puzzled the attendant beyond measure. He seemed quite bewil-
dered, and his brows were gathered in as he said, "I can't
understand the two things. He could mark his face like that
by beating his own head on the floor. I saw a young woman do
it once at the Eversfield Asylum before anyone could lay
hands on her. And I suppose he might have broken his neck by
falling out of bed, if he got in an awkward kink. But for
the life of me I can't imagine how the two things occurred.
If his back was broke, he couldn't beat his head, and if his
face was like that before the fall out of bed, there would be
marks of it."

I said to him, "Go to Dr. Van Helsing, and ask him to
kindly come here at once. I want him without an instant's
delay."

The man ran off, and within a few minutes the Professor,
in his dressing gown and slippers, appeared. When he saw
Renfield on the ground, he looked keenly at him a moment, and
then turned to me. I think he recognized my thought in my
eyes, for he said very quietly, manifestly for the ears of
the attendant, "Ah, a sad accident! He will need very care-
ful watching, and much attention. I shall stay with you my-
self, but I shall first dress myself. If you will remain I
shall in a few minutes join you."

The patient was now breathing stertorously and it was
easy to see that he had suffered some terrible injury.

Van Helsing returned with extraordinary celerity, bear-
ing with him a surgical case. He had evidently been thinking
and had his mind made up, for almost before he looked at the
patient, he whispered to me, "Send the attendant away. We
must be alone with him when he becomes conscious, after the
operation."

I said, "I think that will do now, Simmons. We have
done all that we can at present. You had better go your
round, and Dr. Van Helsing will operate. Let me know instant-
ly if there be anything unusual anywhere."

The man withdrew, and we went into a strict examination
of the patient. The wounds of the face were superficial. The
real injury was a depressed fracture of the skull, extending
right up through the motor area.

The Professor thought a moment and said, "We must reduce
the pressure and get back to normal conditions, as far as can
be. The rapidity of the suffusion shows the terrible nature
of his injury. The whole motor area seems affected. The
suffusion of the brain will increase quickly, so we must tre-
phine at once or it may be too late."

As he was speaking there was a soft tapping at the door.
I went over and opened it and found in the corridor without,
Arthur and Quincey in pajamas and slippers, the former spoke,
"I heard your man call up Dr. Van Helsing and tell him of an
accident. So I woke Quincey or rather called for him as he
was not asleep. Things are moving too quickly and too
strangely for sound sleep for any of us these times. I've
been thinking that tomorrow night will not see things as
they have been. We'll have to look back, and forward a
little more than we have done. May we come in?"

I nodded, and held the door open till they had entered,
then I closed it again. When Quincey saw the attitude and
state of the patient, and noted the horrible pool on the
floor, he said softly, "My God! What has happened to him?
Poor, poor devil!"

I told him briefly, and added that we expected he would
recover consciousness after the operation, for a short time,
at all events. He went at once and sat down on the edge of
the bed, with Godalming beside him. We all watched in
patience.

"We shall wait," said Van Helsing, "just long enough to
fix the best spot for trephining, so that we may most quickly
and perfectly remove the blood clot, for it is evident that
the haemorrhage is increasing."

The minutes during which we waited passed with fearful
slowness. I had a horrible sinking in my heart, and from
Van Helsing's face I gathered that he felt some fear or
apprehension as to what was to come. I dreaded the words
Renfield might speak. I was positively afraid to think. But
the conviction of what was coming was on me, as I have read
of men who have heard the death watch. The poor man's breath-
ing came in uncertain gasps. Each instant he seemed as though
he would open his eyes and speak, but then would follow a
prolonged stertorous breath, and he would relapse into a more
fixed insensibility. Inured as I was to sick beds and death,
this suspense grew and grew upon me. I could almost hear the
beating of my own heart, and the blood surging through my
temples sounded like blows from a hammer. The silence finally
became agonizing. I looked at my companions, one after ano-
ther, and saw from their flushed faces and damp brows that
they were enduring equal torture. There was a nervous sus-
pense over us all, as though overhead some dread bell would
peal out powerfully when we should least expect it.

At last there came a time when it was evident that the
patient was sinking fast. He might die at any moment. I
looked up at the Professor and caught his eyes fixed on mine.
His face was sternly set as he spoke, "There is no time to
lose. His words may be worth many lives. I have been think-
ing so, as I stood here. It may be there is a soul at stake!
We shall operate just above the ear."

Without another word he made the operation. For a few
moments the breathing continued to be stertorous. Then there
came a breath so prolonged that it seemed as though it would
tear open his chest. Suddenly his eyes opened, and became
fixed in a wild, helpless stare. This was continued for a few
moments, then it was softened into a glad surprise, and from
his lips came a sigh of relief. He moved convulsively, and as
he did so, said, "I'll be quiet, Doctor. Tell them to take
off the strait waistcoat. I have had a terrible dream, and
it has left me so weak that I cannot move. What's wrong with
my face? It feels all swollen, and it smarts dreadfully."

He tried to turn his head, but even with the effort his
eyes seemed to grow glassy again so I gently put it back.
Then Van Helsing said in a quiet grave tone, "Tell us your
dream, Mr. Renfield."

As he heard the voice his face brightened, through its
mutilation, and he said, "That is Dr. Van Helsing. How
good it is of you to be here. Give me some water, my lips
are dry, and I shall try to tell you. I dreamed". . .

He stopped and seemed fainting. I called quietly to
Quincey, "The brandy, it is in my study, quick!" He flew
and returned with a glass, the decanter of brandy and a
carafe of water. We moistened the parched lips, and the
patient quickly revived.

It seemed, however, that his poor injured brain had
been working in the interval, for when he was quite conscious,
he looked at me piercingly with an agonized confusion which
I shall never forget, and said, "I must not deceive myself.
It was no dream, but all a grim reality." Then his eyes
roved round the room. As they caught sight of the two
figures sitting patiently on the edge of the bed he went on,
"If I were not sure already, I would know from them."

For an instant his eyes closed, not with pain or sleep
but voluntarily, as though he were bringing all his faculties
to bear. When he opened them he said, hurriedly, and with
more energy than he had yet displayed, "Quick, Doctor, quick,
I am dying! I feel that I have but a few minutes, and then I
must go back to death, or worse! Wet my lips with brandy
again. I have something that I must say before I die. Or
before my poor crushed brain dies anyhow. Thank you! It was
that night after you left me, when I implored you to let me
go away. I couldn't speak then, for I felt my tongue was
tied. But I was as sane then, except in that way, as I am
now. I was in an agony of despair for a long time after you
left me, it seemed hours. Then there came a sudden peace to
me. My brain seemed to become cool again, and I realized
where I was. I heard the dogs bark behind our house, but not
where He was!"

As he spoke, Van Helsing's eyes never blinked, but his
hand came out and met mine and gripped it hard. He did not,
however, betray himself. He nodded slightly and said, "Go
on," in a low voice.

Renfield proceeded. "He came up to the window in the
mist, as I had seen him often before, but he was solid then,
not a ghost, and his eyes were fierce like a man's when
angry. He was laughing with his red mouth, the sharp white
teeth glinted in the moonlight when he turned to look back
over the belt of trees, to where the dogs were barking. I
wouldn't ask him to come in at first, though I knew he wanted
to, just as he had wanted all along. Then he began promising
me things, not in words but by doing them."

He was interrupted by a word from the Professor, "How?"

"By making them happen. Just as he used to send in the
flies when the sun was shining. Great big fat ones with
steel and sapphire on their wings. And big moths, in the
night, with skull and cross-bones on their backs."

Van Helsing nodded to him as he whispered to me uncon-
sciously, "The Acherontia Atropos of the Sphinges, what you
call the `Death's-head Moth'?"

The patient went on without stopping, "Then he began
to whisper.`Rats, rats, rats! Hundreds, thousands, millions
of them, and every one a life.  And dogs to eat them, and cats
too. All lives! All red blood, with years of life in it, and
not merely buzzing flies!' I laughed at him, for I wanted to
see what he could do. Then the dogs howled, away beyond the
dark trees in His house. He beckoned me to the window. I got
up and looked out, and He raised his hands, and seemed to call
out without using any words. A dark mass spread over the
grass, coming on like the shape of a flame of fire. And then
He moved the mist to the right and left, and I could see that
there were thousands of rats with their eyes blazing red,
like His only smaller. He held up his hand, and they all
stopped, and I thought he seemed to be saying, `All these
lives will I give you, ay, and many more and greater, through
countless ages, if you will fall down and worship me!' And
then a red cloud, like the color of blood, seemed to close
over my eyes, and before I knew what I was doing, I found
myself opening the sash and saying to Him, `Come in, Lord
and Master!' The rats were all gone, but He slid into the
room through the sash, though it was only open an inch wide,
just as the Moon herself has often come in through the tini-
est crack and has stood before me in all her size and
splendor."

His voice was weaker, so I moistened his lips with the
brandy again, and he continued, but it seemed as though his
memory had gone on working in the interval for his story was
further advanced. I was about to call him back to the point,
but Van Helsing whispered to me, "Let him go on. Do not
interrupt him. He cannot go back, and maybe could not pro-
ceed at all if once he lost the thread of his thought."

He proceeded, "All day I waited to hear from him, but
he did not send me anything, not even a blowfly, and when the
moon got up I was pretty angry with him. When he did slide in
through the window, though it was shut, and did not even
knock, I got mad with him. He sneered at me, and his white
face looked out of the mist with his red eyes gleaming, and
he went on as though he owned the whole place, and I was no
one. He didn't even smell the same as he went by me. I
couldn't hold him. I thought that, somehow, Mrs. Harker had
come into the room."

The two men sitting on the bed stood up and came over,
standing behind him so that he could not see them, but where
they could hear better. They were both silent, but the Pro-
fessor started and quivered. His face, however, grew grimmer
and sterner still. Renfield went on without noticing, "When
Mrs. Harker came in to see me this afternoon she wasn't the
same. It was like tea after the teapot has been watered."
Here we all moved, but no one said a word.

He went on, "I didn't know that she was here till she
spoke, and she didn't look the same. I don't care for the
pale people. I like them with lots of blood in them, and
hers all seemed to have run out. I didn't think of it at the
time, but when she went away I began to think, and it made me
mad to know that He had been taking the life out of her." I
could feel that the rest quivered, as I did. But we remained
otherwise still. "So when He came tonight I was ready for
Him. I saw the mist stealing in, and I grabbed it tight. I
had heard that madmen have unnatural strength. And as I knew
I was a madman, at times anyhow, I resolved to use my power.
Ay, and He felt it too, for He had to come out of the mist to
struggle with me. I held tight, and I thought I was going to
win, for I didn't mean Him to take any more of her life, till
I saw His eyes. They burned into me, and my strength became
like water. He slipped through it, and when I tried to cling
to Him, He raised me up and flung me down. There was a red
cloud before me, and a noise like thunder, and the mist seemed
to steal away under the door."

His voice was becoming fainter and his breath more ster-
torous. Van Helsing stood up instinctively.

"We know the worst now," he said. "He is here, and we
know his purpose. It may not be too late. Let us be armed,
the same as we were the other night, but lose no time, there
is not an instant to spare."

There was no need to put our fear, nay our conviction,
into words, we shared them in common. We all hurried and
took from our rooms the same things that we had when we
entered the Count's house. The Professor had his ready, and
as we met in the corridor he pointed to them significantly
as he said, "They never leave me, and they shall not till
this unhappy business is over. Be wise also, my friends. It
is no common enemy that we deal with Alas! Alas! That dear
Madam Mina should suffer!" He stopped, his voice was breaking,
and I do not know if rage or terror predominated in my own
heart.

Outside the Harkers' door we paused. Art and Quincey
held back, and the latter said, "Should we disturb her?"

"We must," said Van Helsing grimly. "If the door be
locked, I shall break it in."

"May it not frighten her terribly? It is unusual to
break into a lady's room!"

Van Helsing said solemnly, "You are always right. But
this is life and death. All chambers are alike to the doctor.
And even were they not they are all as one to me tonight.
Friend John, when I turn the handle, if the door does not
open, do you put your shoulder down and shove. And you too,
my friends. Now!"

He turned the handle as he spoke, but the door did not
yield. We threw ourselves against it. With a crash it burst
open, and we almost fell headlong into the room. The Pro-
fessor did actually fall, and I saw across him as he gathered
himself up from hands and knees. What I saw appalled me. I
felt my hair rise like bristles on the back of my neck, and
my heart seemed to stand still.

The moonlight was so bright that through the thick
yellow blind the room was light enough to see. On the bed
beside the window lay Jonathan Harker, his face flushed and
breathing heavily as though in a stupor. Kneeling on the
near edge of the bed facing outwards was the white-clad
figure of his wife. By her side stood a tall, thin man, clad
in black. His face was turned from us, but the instant we
saw we all recognized the Count, in every way, even to the
scar on his forehead. With his left hand he held both Mrs.
Harker's hands, keeping them away with her arms at full ten-
sion. His right hand gripped her by the back of the neck,
forcing her face down on his bosom. Her white night-dress
was smeared with blood, and a thin stream trickled down the
man's bare chest which was shown by his torn-open dress. The
attitude of the two had a terrible resemblance to a child
forcing a kitten's nose into a saucer of milk to compel it
to drink. As we burst into the room, the Count turned his
face, and the hellish look that I had heard described seemed
to leap into it. His eyes flamed red with devilish passion.
The great nostrils of the white aquiline nose opened wide
and quivered at the edge, and the white sharp teeth, behind
the full lips of the blood dripping mouth, clamped together
like those of a wild beast. With a wrench, which threw his
victim back upon the bed as though hurled from a height, he
turned and sprang at us. But by this time the Professor had
gained his feet, and was holding towards him the envelope
which contained the Sacred Wafer. The Count suddenly stopped,
just as poor Lucy had done outside the tomb, and cowered
back. Further and further back he cowered, as we, lifting
our crucifixes, advanced. The moonlight suddenly failed, as
a great black cloud sailed across the sky. And when the
gaslight sprang up under Quincey's match, we saw nothing but
a faint vapor. This, as we looked, trailed under the door,
which with the recoil from its bursting open, had swung back
to its old position. Van Helsing, Art, and I moved forward
to Mrs. Harker, who by this time had drawn her breath and
with it had given a scream so wild, so ear-piercing, so des-
pairing that it seems to me now that it will ring in my ears
till my dying day. For a few seconds she lay in her helpless
attitude and disarray. Her face was ghastly, with a pallor
which was accentuated by the blood which smeared her lips
and cheeks and chin. From her throat trickled a thin stream
of blood. Her eyes were mad with terror. Then she put before
her face her poor crushed hands, which bore on their white-
ness the red mark of the Count's terrible grip, and from
behind them came a low desolate wail which made the terrible
scream seem only the quick expression of an endless grief.
Van Helsing stepped forward and drew the coverlet gently
over her body, whilst Art, after looking at her face for an
instant despairingly, ran out of the room.

Van Helsing whispered to me, "Jonathan is in a stupor
such as we know the Vampire can produce. We can do nothing
with poor Madam Mina for a few moments till she recovers
herself. I must wake him!"

He dipped the end of a towel in cold water and with it
began to flick him on the face, his wife all the while hold-
ing her face between her hands and sobbing in a way that was
heart breaking to hear. I raised the blind, and looked out
of the window. There was much moonshine, and as I looked I
could see Quincey Morris run across the lawn and hide him-
self in the shadow of a great yew tree. It puzzled me to
think why he was doing this. But at the instant I heard Har-
ker's quick exclamation as he woke to partial consciousness,
and turned to the bed. On his face, as there might well be,
was a look of wild amazement. He seemed dazed for a few se-
conds, and then full consciousness seemed to burst upon him
all at once, and he started up.

His wife was aroused by the quick movement, and turned
to him with her arms stretched out, as though to embrace him.
Instantly, however, she drew them in again, and putting her
elbows together, held her hands before her face, and shuddered
till the bed beneath her shook.

"In God's name what does this mean?" Harker cried out.
"Dr. Seward, Dr. Van Helsing, what is it? What has happened?
What is wrong? Mina, dear what is it? What does that blood
mean? My God, my God! Has it come to this!" And, raising
himself to his knees, he beat his hands wildly together."Good
God help us! Help her! Oh, help her!"

With a quick movement he jumped from bed, and began to
pull on his clothes, all the man in him awake at the need for
instant exertion. "What has happened? Tell me all about it!"
he cried without pausing. "Dr. Van Helsing you love Mina, I
know. Oh, do something to save her. It cannot have gone too
far yet. Guard her while I look for him!"

His wife, through her terror and horror and distress,
saw some sure danger to him. Instantly forgetting her own
grief, she seized hold of him and cried out.

"No! No! Jonathan, you must not leave me. I have
suffered enough tonight, God knows, without the dread of his
harming you. You must stay with me. Stay with these friends
who will watch over you!" Her expression became frantic as
she spoke. And, he yielding to her, she pulled him down
sitting on the bedside, and clung to him fiercely.

Van Helsing and I tried to calm them both. The Professor
held up his golden crucifix, and said with wonderful calm-
ness, "Do not fear, my dear. We are here, and whilst this
is close to you no foul thing can approach. You are safe for
tonight, and we must be calm and take counsel together."

She shuddered and was silent, holding down her head on
her husband's breast. When she raised it, his white night-
robe was stained with blood where her lips had touched, and
where the thin open wound in the neck had sent forth drops.
The instant she saw it she drew back, with a low wail, and
whispered, amidst choking sobs.

"Unclean, unclean! I must touch him or kiss him no more.
Oh, that it should be that it is I who am now his worst enemy,
and whom he may have most cause to fear."

To this he spoke out resolutely, "Nonsense, Mina. It is
a shame to me to hear such a word. I would not hear it of
you. And I shall not hear it from you. May God judge me by
my deserts, and punish me with more bitter suffering than
even this hour, if by any act or will of mine anything ever
come between us!"

He put out his arms and folded her to his breast. And
for a while she lay there sobbing. He looked at us over her
bowed head, with eyes that blinked damply above his quivering
nostrils. His mouth was set as steel.

After a while her sobs became less frequent and more
faint, and then he said to me, speaking with a studied calm-
ness which I felt tried his nervous power to the utmost.

"And now, Dr. Seward, tell me all about it. Too well
I know the broad fact. Tell me all that has been."

I told him exactly what had happened and he listened
with seeming impassiveness, but his nostrils twitched and
his eyes blazed as I told how the ruthless hands of the
Count had held his wife in that terrible and horrid position,
with her mouth to the open wound in his breast. It interested
me, even at that moment, to see that whilst the face of white
set passion worked convulsively over the bowed head, the
hands tenderly and lovingly stroked the ruffled hair. Just
as I had finished, Quincey and Godalming knocked at the door.
They entered in obedience to our summons. Van Helsing looked
at me questioningly. I understood him to mean if we were to
take advantage of their coming to divert if possible the
thoughts of the unhappy husband and wife from each other and
from themselves. So on nodding acquiescence to him he asked
them what they had seen or done. To which Lord Godalming
answered.

"I could not see him anywhere in the passage, or in any
of our rooms. I looked in the study but, though he had been
there, he had gone. He had, however. . ." He stopped
suddenly, looking at the poor drooping figure on the bed.

Van Helsing said gravely, "Go on, friend Arthur. We
want here no more concealments. Our hope now is in knowing
all. Tell freely!"

So Art went on, "He had been there, and though it could
only have been for a few seconds, he made rare hay of the
place. All the manuscript had been burned, and the blue
flames were flickering amongst the white ashes. The cylin-
ders of your phonograph too were thrown on the fire, and the
wax had helped the flames."

Here I interrupted. "Thank God there is the other copy
in the safe!"

His face lit for a moment, but fell again as he went on.
"I ran downstairs then, but could see no sign of him. I
looked into Renfield's room, but there was no trace there
except. . ." Again he paused.

"Go on," said Harker hoarsely. So he bowed his head and
moistening his lips with his tongue, added, "except that the
poor fellow is dead."

Mrs. Harker raised her head, looking from one to the
other of us she said solemnly, "God's will be done!"

I could not but feel that Art was keeping back some-
thing. But, as I took it that it was with a purpose, I said
nothing.

Van Helsing turned to Morris and asked, "And you, friend
Quincey, have you any to tell?"

"A little," he answered. "It may be much eventually,
but at present I can't say. I thought it well to know if
possible where the Count would go when he left the house. I
did not see him, but I saw a bat rise from Renfield's window,
and flap westward. I expected to see him in some shape go
back to Carfax, but he evidently sought some other lair. He
will not be back tonight, for the sky is reddening in the
east, and the dawn is close. We must work tomorrow!"

He said the latter words through his shut teeth. For a
space of perhaps a couple of minutes there was silence, and I
could fancy that I could hear the sound of our hearts beat-
ing.

Then Van Helsing said, placing his hand tenderly on Mrs.
Harker's head, "And now, Madam Mina, poor dear, dear, Madam
Mina, tell us exactly what happened. God knows that I do not
want that you be pained, but it is need that we know all. For
now more than ever has all work to be done quick and sharp,
and in deadly earnest. The day is close to us that must end
all, if it may be so, and now is the chance that we may live
and learn."

The poor dear lady shivered, and I could see the ten-
sion of her nerves as she clasped her husband closer to her
and bent her head lower and lower still on his breast. Then
she raised her head proudly, and held out one hand to Van
Helsing who took it in his, and after stooping and kissing it
reverently, held it fast. The other hand was locked in that
of her husband, who held his other arm thrown round her pro-
tectingly. After a pause in which she was evidently ordering
her thoughts, she began.

"I took the sleeping draught which you had so kindly
given me, but for a long time it did not act. I seemed to
become more wakeful, and myriads of horrible fancies began
to crowd in upon my mind. All of them connected with death,
and vampires, with blood, and pain, and trouble." Her hus-
band involuntarily groaned as she turned to him and said
lovingly, "Do not fret, dear. You must be brave and strong,
and help me through the horrible task. If you only knew what
an effort it is to me to tell of this fearful thing at all,
you would understand how much I need your help. Well, I saw
I must try to help the medicine to its work with my will, if
it was to do me any good, so I resolutely set myself to sleep.
Sure enough sleep must soon have come to me, for I remember
no more. Jonathan coming in had not waked me, for he lay by
my side when next I remember. There was in the room the same
thin white mist that I had before noticed. But I forget now
if you know of this. You will find it in my diary which I
shall show you later. I felt the same vague terror which had
come to me before and the same sense of some presence. I
turned to wake Jonathan, but found that he slept so soundly
that it seemed as if it was he who had taken the sleeping
draught, and not I. I tried, but I could not wake him. This
caused me a great fear, and I looked around terrified. Then
indeed, my heart sank within me. Beside the bed, as if he
had stepped out of the mist, or rather as if the mist had
turned into his figure, for it had entirely disappeared,
stood a tall, thin man, all in black. I knew him at once
from the description of the others. The waxen face, the
high aquiline nose, on which the light fell in a thin white
line, the parted red lips, with the sharp white teeth show-
ing between, and the red eyes that I had seemed to see in
the sunset on the windows of St. Mary's Church at Witby. I
knew, too, the red scar on his forehead where Jonathan had
struck him. For an instant my heart stood still, and I would
have screamed out, only that I was paralyzed. In the pause
he spoke in a sort of keen, cutting whisper, pointing as he
spoke to Jonathan.

"`Silence! If you make a sound I shall take him and
dash his brains out before your very eyes.' I was appalled
and was too bewildered to do or say anything. With a mocking
smile, he placed one hand upon my shoulder and, holding me
tight, bared my throat with the other, saying as he did so,
`First, a little refreshment to reward my exertions. You may
as well be quiet. It is not the first time, or the second,
that your veins have appeased my thirst!' I was bewildered,
and strangely enough, I did not want to hinder him. I suppose
it is a part of the horrible curse that such is, when his
touch is on his victim. And oh, my God, my God, pity me! He
placed his reeking lips upon my throat!" Her husband groaned
again. She clasped his hand harder, and looked at him pity-
ingly, as if he were the injured one, and went on.

"I felt my strength fading away, and I was in a half
swoon. How long this horrible thing lasted I know not, but
it seemed that a long time must have passed before he took
his foul, awful, sneering mouth away. I saw it drip with the
fresh blood!"The remembrance seemed for a while to overpower
her, and she drooped and would have sunk down but for her
husband's sustaining arm. With a great effort she recovered
herself and went on.

"Then he spoke to me mockingly, `And so you, like the
others, would play your brains against mine. You would help
these men to hunt me and frustrate me in my design! You know
now, and they know in part already, and will know in full
before long, what it is to cross my path. They should have
kept their energies for use closer to home. Whilst they play-
ed wits against me, against me who commanded nations, and
intrigued for them, and fought for them, hundreds of years
before they were born, I was countermining them. And you,
their best beloved one, are now to me, flesh of my flesh,
blood of my blood, kin of my kin, my bountiful wine-press
for a while, and shall be later on my companion and my
helper. You shall be avenged in turn, for not one of them
but shall minister to your needs. But as yet you are to be
punished for what you have done. You have aided in thwarting
me. Now you shall come to my call. When my brain says "Come!"
to you, you shall cross land or sea to do my bidding. And to
that end this!'

With that he pulled open his shirt, and with his long
sharp nails opened a vein in his breast. When the blood
began to spurt out, he took my hands in one of his, holding
them tight, and with the other seized my neck and pressed my
mouth to the wound, so that I must either suffocate or
swallow some to the. . .Oh, my God! My God! What have I
done? What have I done to deserve such a fate, I who have
tried to walk in meekness and righteousness all my days. God
pity me! Look down on a poor soul in worse than mortal peril.
And in mercy pity those to whom she is dear!" Then she began
to rub her lips as though to cleanse them from pollution.

As she was telling her terrible story, the eastern sky
began to quicken, and everything became more and more clear.
Harker was still and quiet. But over his face, as the awful
narrative went on, came a grey look which deepened and deep-
ened in the morning light, till when the first red streak of
the coming dawn shot up, the flesh stood darkly out against
the whitening hair.

We have arranged that one of us is to stay within call
of the unhappy pair till we can meet together and arrange
about taking action.

Of this I am sure. The sun rises today on no more
miserable house in all the great round of its daily course.





CHAPTER 22


JONATHAN HARKER'S JOURNAL


3 October.--As I must do something or go mad, I write
this diary. It is now six o'clock, and we are to meet in
the study in half an hour and take something to eat, for Dr.
Van Helsing and Dr. Seward are agreed that if we do not eat
we cannot work our best. Our best will be, God knows, required
today. I must keep writing at every chance, for I dare not
stop to think. All, big and little, must go down. Perhaps at
the end the little things may teach us most. The teaching, big
or little, could not have landed Mina or me anywhere worse
than we are today. However, we must trust and hope. Poor
Mina told me just now, with the tears running down her dear
cheeks, that it is in trouble and trial that our faith is
tested. That we must keep on trusting, and that God will aid
us up to the end. The end! Oh my God! What end?. . .
To work! To work!

When Dr. Van Helsing and Dr. Seward had come back from
seeing poor Renfield, we went gravely into what was to be
done. First, Dr. Seward told us that when he and Dr. Van
Helsing had gone down to the room below they had found Ren-
field lying on the floor, all in a heap. His face was
all bruised and crushed in, and the bones of the neck were
broken.

Dr. Seward asked the attendant who was on duty in the
passage if he had heard anything. He said that he had been
sitting down, he confessed to half dozing, when he heard
loud voices in the room, and then Renfield had called out
loudly several times, "God! God! God!" After that there
was a sound of falling, and when he entered the room he
found him lying on the floor, face down, just as the doctors
had seen him. Van Helsing asked if he had heard "voices" or
"a voice," and he said he could not say. That at first it
had seemed to him as if there were two, but as there was no
one in the room it could have been only one. He could swear
to it, if required, that the word "God" was spoken by the
patient.

Dr. Seward said to us, when we were alone, that he did
not wish to go into the matter. The question of an inquest
had to be considered, and it would never do to put forward
the truth, as no one would believe it. As it was, he thought
that on the attendant's evidence he could give a certificate
of death by misadventure in falling from bed. In case the
coroner should demand it, there would be a formal inquest,
necessarily to the same result.

When the question began to be discussed as to what
should be our next step, the very first thing we decided was
that Mina should be in full confidence. That nothing of any
sort, no matter how painful, should be kept from her. She
herself agreed as to its wisdom, and it was pitiful to see
her so brave and yet so sorrowful, and in such a depth of
despair.

"There must be no concealment," she said. "Alas! We
have had too much already. And besides there is nothing in
all the world that can give me more pain than I have already
endured, than I suffer now! Whatever may happen, it must be
of new hope or of new courage to me!"

Van Helsing was looking at her fixedly as she spoke,
and said, suddenly but quietly, "But dear Madam Mina, are
you not afraid. Not for yourself, but for others from your-
self, after what has happened?"

Her face grew set in its lines, but her eyes shone with
the devotion of a martyr as she answered, "Ah no! For my
mind is made up!"

"To what?" he asked gently, whilst we were all very
still, for each in our own way we had a sort of vague idea
of what she meant.

Her answer came with direct simplicity, as though she
was simply stating a fact, "Because if I find in myself,
and I shall watch keenly for it, a sign of harm to any that
I love, I shall die!"

"You would not kill yourself?" he asked, hoarsely.

"I would. If there were no friend who loved me, who
would save me such a pain, and so desperate an effort!" She
looked at him meaningly as she spoke.

He was sitting down, but now he rose and came close to
her and put his hand on her head as he said solemnly. "My
child, there is such an one if it were for your good. For
myself I could hold it in my account with God to find such
an euthanasia for you, even at this moment if it were best.
Nay, were it safe! But my child. . ."

For a moment he seemed choked, and a great sob rose in
his throat. He gulped it down and went on, "There are here
some who would stand between you and death. You must not
die. You must not die by any hand, but least of all your
own. Until the other, who has fouled your sweet life, is
true dead you must not die. For if he is still with the
quick Undead, your death would make you even as he is. No,
you must live! You must struggle and strive to live, though
death would seem a boon unspeakable. You must fight Death
himself, though he come to you in pain or in joy. By the
day, or the night, in safety or in peril! On your living
soul I charge you that you do not die. Nay, nor think of
death, till this great evil be past."

The poor dear grew white as death, and shook and shiv-
ered, as I have seen a quicksand shake and shiver at the
incoming of the tide. We were all silent. We could do
nothing. At length she grew more calm and turning to him
said sweetly, but oh so sorrowfully, as she held out her
hand, "I promise you, my dear friend, that if God will let
me live, I shall strive to do so. Till, if it may be in His
good time, this horror may have passed away from me."

She was so good and brave that we all felt that our
hearts were strengthened to work and endure for her, and we
began to discuss what we were to do. I told her that she
was to have all the papers in the safe, and all the papers
or diaries and phonographs we might hereafter use, and was
to keep the record as she had done before. She was pleased
with the prospect of anything to do, if "pleased" could be
used in connection with so grim an interest.

As usual Van Helsing had thought ahead of everyone else,
and was prepared with an exact ordering of our work.

"It is perhaps well," he said, "that at our meeting
after our visit to Carfax we decided not to do anything with
the earth boxes that lay there. Had we done so, the Count
must have guessed our purpose, and would doubtless have
taken measures in advance to frustrate such an effort with
regard to the others. But now he does not know our inten-
tions. Nay, more, in all probability, he does not know that
such a power exists to us as can sterilize his lairs, so
that he cannot use them as of old.

"We are now so much further advanced in our knowledge
as to their disposition that, when we have examined the
house in Piccadilly, we may track the very last of them. Today
then, is ours, and in it rests our hope. The sun that rose
on our sorrow this morning guards us in its course. Until it
sets tonight, that monster must retain whatever form he now
has. He is confined within the limitations of his earthly
envelope. He cannot melt into thin air nor disappear through
cracks or chinks or crannies. If he go through a doorway, he
must open the door like a mortal. And so we have this day to
hunt out all his lairs and sterilize them. So we shall, if
we have not yet catch him and destroy him, drive him to bay
in some place where the catching and the destroying shall be,
in time, sure."

Here I started up for I could not contain myself at the
thought that the minutes and seconds so preciously laden
with Mina's life and happiness were flying from us, since
whilst we talked action was impossible. But Van Helsing held
up his hand warningly.

"Nay, friend Jonathan," he said, "in this, the quickest
way home is the longest way, so your proverb say. We shall
all act and act with desperate quick, when the time has come.
But think, in all probable the key of the situation is in
that house in Piccadilly. The Count may have many houses
which he has bought. Of them he will have deeds of purchase,
keys and other things. He will have paper that he write on.
He will have his book of cheques. There are many belongings
that he must have somewhere. Why not in this place so cen-
tral, so quiet, where he come and go by the front or the back
at all hours, when in the very vast of the traffic there is
none to notice. We shall go there and search that house. And
when we learn what it holds, then we do what our friend Art-
hur call, in his phrases of hunt `stop the earths' and so we
run down our old fox, so? Is it not?"

"Then let us come at once," I cried, "we are wasting
the precious, precious time!"

The Professor did not move, but simply said, "And how
are we to get into that house in Piccadilly?"

"Any way!" I cried. "We shall break in if need be."

"And your police? Where will they be, and what will
they say?"

I was staggered, but I knew that if he wished to delay
he had a good reason for it. So I said, as quietly as I
could, "Don't wait more than need be. You know, I am sure,
what torture I am in."

"Ah, my child, that I do. And indeed there is no wish
of me to add to your anguish. But just think, what can we
do, until all the world be at movement. Then will come our
time. I have thought and thought, and it seems to me that
the simplest way is the best of all. Now we wish to get
into the house, but we have no key. Is it not so?" I nodded.

"Now suppose that you were, in truth, the owner of that
house, and could not still get in. And think there was to
you no conscience of the housebreaker, what would you do?"

"I should get a respectable locksmith, and set him to
work to pick the lock for me."

"And your police, they would interfere, would they not?"

"Oh no! Not if they knew the man was properly employed."

"Then," he looked at me as keenly as he spoke, "all
that is in doubt is the conscience of the employer, and the
belief of your policemen as to whether or not that employer
has a good conscience or a bad one. Your police must indeed
be zealous men and clever, oh so clever, in reading the
heart, that they trouble themselves in such matter. No, no,
my friend Jonathan, you go take the lock off a hundred empty
houses in this your London, or of any city in the world, and
if you do it as such things are rightly done, and at the time
such things are rightly done, no one will interfere. I have
read of a gentleman who owned a so fine house in London, and
when he went for months of summer to Switzerland and lock up
his house, some burglar come and broke window at back and
got in. Then he went and made open the shutters in front and
walk out and in through the door, before the very eyes of the
police. Then he have an auction in that house, and advertise
it, and put up big notice. And when the day come he sell off
by a great auctioneer all the goods of that other man who
own them. Then he go to a builder, and he sell him that
house, making an agreement that he pull it down and take all
away within a certain time. And your police and other
authority help him all they can. And when that owner come
back from his holiday in Switzerland he find only an empty
hole where his house had been. This was all done en regle,
and in our work we shall be en regle too. We shall not go so
early that the policemen who have then little to think of,
shall deem it strange. But we shall go after ten o'clock,
when there are many about, and such things would be done were
we indeed owners of the house."

I could not but see how right he was and the terrible
despair of Mina's face became relaxed in thought. There was
hope in such good counsel.

Van Helsing went on, "When once within that house we
may find more clues. At any rate some of us can remain
there whilst the rest find the other places where there be
more earth boxes, at Bermondsey and Mile End."

Lord Godalming stood up. "I can be of some use here,"
he said. "I shall wire to my people to have horses and
carriages where they will be most convenient."

"Look here, old fellow," said Morris, "it is a capital
idea to have all ready in case we want to go horse backing,
but don't you think that one of your snappy carriages with
its heraldic adornments in a byway of Walworth or Mile End
would attract too much attention for our purpose? It seems
to me that we ought to take cabs when we go south or east.
And even leave them somewhere near the neighborhood we are
going to."

"Friend Quincey is right!" said the Professor. "His
head is what you call in plane with the horizon. It is a
difficult thing that we go to do, and we do not want no
peoples to watch us if so it may."

Mina took a growing interest in everything and I was
rejoiced to see that the exigency of affairs was helping
her to forget for a time the terrible experience of the
night. She was very, very pale, almost ghastly, and so thin
that her lips were drawn away, showing her teeth in somewhat
of prominence. I did not mention this last, lest it should
give her needless pain, but it made my blood run cold in my
veins to think of what had occurred with poor Lucy when the
Count had sucked her blood. As yet there was no sign of the
teeth growing sharper, but the time as yet was short, and
there was time for fear.

When we came to the discussion of the sequence of our
efforts and of the disposition of our forces, there were new
sources of doubt. It was finally agreed that before starting
for Piccadilly we should destroy the Count's lair close at
hand. In case he should find it out too soon, we should thus
be still ahead of him in our work of destruction. And his
presence in his purely material shape, and at his weakest,
might give us some new clue.

A s to the disposal of forces, it was suggested by the
Professor that, after our visit to Carfax, we should all
enter the house in Piccadilly. That the two doctors and I
should remain there, whilst Lord Godalming and Quincey found
the lairs at Walworth and Mile End and destroyed them. It was
possible, if not likely, the Professor urged, that the Count
might appear in Piccadilly during the day, and that if so we
might be able to cope with him then and there. At any rate,
we might be able to follow him in force. To this plan I
strenuously objected, and so far as my going was concerned,
for I said that I intended to stay and protect Mina. I
thought that my mind was made up on the subject, but Mina
would not listen to my objection. She said that there might
be some law matter in which I could be useful. That amongst
the Count's papers might be some clue which I could under-
stand out of my experience in Transylvania. And that, as it
was, all the strength we could muster was required to cope
with the Count's extraordinary power. I had to give in, for
Mina's resolution was fixed. She said that it was the last
hope for her that we should all work together.

"As for me," she said, "I have no fear. Things have
been as bad as they can be. And whatever may happen must
have in it some element of hope or comfort. Go, my husband!
God can, if He wishes it, guard me as well alone as with any
one present."

So I started up crying out, "Then in God's name let us
come at once, for we are losing time. The Count may come to
Piccadilly earlier than we think."

"Not so!" said Van Helsing, holding up his hand.

"But why?" I asked.

"Do you forget," he said, with actually a smile, "that
last night he banqueted heavily, and will sleep late?"

Did I forget! Shall I ever. . .can I ever! Can any
of us ever forget that terrible scene! Mina struggled hard
to keep her brave countenance, but the pain overmastered her
and she put her hands before her face, and shuddered whilst
she moaned. Van Helsing had not intended to recall her
frightful experience. He had simply lost sight of her and
her part in the affair in his intellectual effort.

When it struck him what he said, he was horrified at his
thoughtlessness and tried to comfort her.

"Oh, Madam Mina," he said, "dear, dear, Madam Mina, alas!
That I of all who so reverence you should have said anything
so forgetful. These stupid old lips of mine and this stupid
old head do not deserve so, but you will forget it, will you
not?" He bent low beside her as he spoke.

She took his hand, and looking at him through her tears,
said hoarsely, "No, I shall not forget, for it is well that
I remember. And with it I have so much in memory of you that
is sweet, that I take it all together. Now, you must all be
going soon. Breakfast is ready, and we must all eat that we
may be strong."

Breakfast was a strange meal to us all. We tried to be
cheerful and encourage each other, and Mina was the brightest
and most cheerful of us. When it was over, Van Helsing stood
up and said, "Now, my dear friends, we go forth to our terr-
ible enterprise. Are we all armed, as we were on that night
when first we visited our enemy's lair.  Armed against ghostly
as well as carnal attack?"

We all assured him.

"Then it is well. Now, Madam Mina, you are in any case
quite safe here until the sunset. And before then we shall
return. . .if. . .We shall return! But before we go let
me see you armed against personal attack. I have myself, since
you came down, prepared your chamber by the placing of things
of which we know, so that He may not enter. Now let me guard
yourself. On your forehead I touch this piece of Sacred Wafer
in the name of the Father, the Son, and. . .

There was a fearful scream which almost froze our
hearts to hear. As he had placed the Wafer on Mina's fore-
head, it had seared it. . .had burned into the flesh as
though it had been a piece of whitehot metal. My poor darl-
ing's brain had told her the significance of the fact as
quickly as her nerves received the pain of it, and the two so
overwhelmed her that her overwrought nature had its voice in
that dreadful scream.

But the words to her thought came quickly. The echo of
the scream had not ceased to ring on the air when there came
the reaction, and she sank on her knees on the floor in an
agony of abasement. Pulling her beautiful hair over her face,
as the leper of old his mantle, she wailed out.

"Unclean! Unclean! Even the Almighty shuns my polluted
flesh! I must bear this mark of shame upon my forehead until
the Judgement Day."

They all paused. I had thrown myself beside her in an
agony of helpless grief, and putting my arms around held her
tight. For a few minutes our sorrowful hearts beat together,
whilst the friends around us turned away their eyes that ran
tears silently. Then Van Helsing turned and said gravely. So
gravely that I could not help feeling that he was in some
way inspired, and was stating things outside himself.

"It may be that you may have to bear that mark till God
himself see fit, as He most surely shall, on the Judgement
Day, to redress all wrongs of the earth and of His children
that He has placed thereon. And oh, Madam Mina, my dear, my
dear, may we who love you be there to see, when that red scar,
the sign of God's knowledge of what has been, shall pass away,
and leave your forehead as pure as the heart we know. For so
surely as we live, that scar shall pass away when God sees
right to lift the burden that is hard upon us. Till then we
bear our Cross, as His Son did in obedience to His Will. It
may be that we are chosen instruments of His good pleasure,
and that we ascend to His bidding as that other through
stripes and shame. Through tears and blood. Through doubts
and fear, and all that makes the difference between God and
man."

There was hope in his words, and comfort. And they
made for resignation. Mina and I both felt so, and simul-
taneously we each took one of the old man's hands and bent
over and kissed it. Then without a word we all knelt down
together, and all holding hands, swore to be true to each
other. We men pledged ourselves to raise the veil of sorrow
from the head of her whom, each in his own way, we loved.  And
we prayed for help and guidance in the terrible task which
lay before us. It was then time to start. So I said farewell
to Mina, a parting which neither of us shall forget to our
dying day, and we set out.

To one thing I have made up my mind. If we find out
that Mina must be a vampire in the end, then she shall not
go into that unknown and terrible land alone. I suppose it
is thus that in old times one vampire meant many. Just as
their hideous bodies could only rest in sacred earth, so the
holiest love was the recruiting sergeant for their ghastly
ranks.

We entered Carfax without trouble and found all things
the same as on the first occasion. It was hard to believe
that amongst so prosaic surroundings of neglect and dust and
decay there was any ground for such fear as already we knew.
Had not our minds been made up, and had there not been terr-
ible memories to spur us on, we could hardly have proceeded
with our task. We found no papers, or any sign of use in the
house. And in the old chapel the great boxes looked just as
we had seen them last.

Dr. Van Helsing said to us solemnly as we stood before
him, "And now, my friends, we have a duty here to do. We
must sterilize this earth, so sacred of holy memories, that
he has brought from a far distant land for such fell use. He
has chosen this earth because it has been holy. Thus we de-
feat him with his own weapon, for we make it more holy still.
It was sanctified to such use of man, now we sanctify it to
God."

As he spoke he took from his bag a screwdriver and a
wrench, and very soon the top of one of the cases was thrown
open. The earth smelled musty and close, but we did not some-
how seem to mind, for our attention was concentrated on the
Professor. Taking from his box a piece of the Scared Wafer
he laid it reverently on the earth, and then shutting down
the lid began to screw it home, we aiding him as he worked.

One by one we treated in the same way each of the great
boxes, and left them as we had found them to all appearance.
But in each was a portion of the Host. When we closed the
door behind us, the Professor said solemnly, "So much is
already done. It may be that with all the others we can be
so successful, then the sunset of this evening may shine of
Madam Mina's forehead all white as ivory and with no stain!"

As we passed across the lawn on our way to the station
to catch our train we could see the front of the asylum. I
looked eagerly, and in the window of my own room saw Mina.
I waved my hand to her, and nodded to tell that our work
there was successfully accomplished. She nodded in reply to
show that she understood. The last I saw, she was waving her
hand in farewell. It was with a heavy heart that we sought
the station and just caught the train, which was steaming in
as we reached the platform. I have written this in the train.


Piccadilly, 12:30 o'clock.--Just before we reached
Fenchurch Street Lord Godalming said to me, "Quincey and I
will find a locksmith. You had better not come with us in
case there should be any difficulty. For under the circum-
stances it wouldn't seem so bad for us to break into an
empty house. But you are a solicitor and the Incorporated
Law Society might tell you that you should have known
better."

I demurred as to my not sharing any danger even of
odium, but he went on, "Besides, it will attract less atten-
tion if there are not too many of us. My title will make it
all right with the locksmith, and with any policeman that may
come along. You had better go with Jack and the Professor and
stay in the Green Park. Somewhere in sight of the house, and
when you see the door opened and the smith has gone away, do
you all come across. We shall be on the lookout for you, and
shall let you in."

"The advice is good!" said Van Helsing, so we said no
more. Godalming and Morris hurried off in a cab, we following
in another. At the corner of Arlington Street our contingent
got out and strolled into the Green Park. My heart beat as I
saw the house on which so much of our hope was centered, loom-
ing up grim and silent in its deserted condition amongst its
more lively and spruce-looking neighbors. We sat down on a
bench within good view , and began to smoke cigars so as to
attract as little attention as possible. The minutes seemed
to pass with leaden feet as we waited for the coming of the
others.

At length we saw a four-wheeler drive up. Out of it,
in leisurely fashion, got Lord Godalming and Morris. And
down from the box descended a thick-set working man with his
rush-woven basket of tools. Morris paid the cabman, who
touched his hat and drove away. Together the two ascended
the steps, and Lord Godalming pointed out what he wanted done.
The workman took off his coat leisurely and hung it on one
of the spikes of the rail, saying something to a policeman
who just then sauntered along. The policeman nodded acqui-
escence, and the man kneeling down placed his bag beside him.
After searching through it, he took out a selection of tools
which he proceeded to lay beside him in orderly fashion. Then
he stood up, looked in the keyhole, blew into it, and turning
to his employers, made some remark. Lord Godalming smiled,
and the man lifted a good sized bunch of keys. Selecting
one of them, he began to probe the lock, as if feeling his
way with it. After fumbling about for a bit he tried a se-
cond, and then a third. All at once the door opened under a
slight push from him, and he and the two others entered the
hall. We sat still. My own cigar burnt furiously, but Van
Helsing's went cold altogether. We waited patiently as we
saw the workman come out and bring his bag. Then he held the
door partly open, steadying it with his knees, whilst he
fitted a key to the lock. This he finally handed to Lord
Godalming, who took out his purse and gave him something. The
man touched his hat, took his bag, put on his coat and de-
parted. Not a soul took the slightest notice of the whole
transaction.

When the man had fairly gone, we three crossed the
street and knocked at the door. It was immediately opened
by Quincey Morris, beside whom stood Lord Godalming lighting
a cigar.

"The place smells so vilely," said the latter as we
came in. It did indeed smell vilely. Like the old chapel at
Carfax. And with our previous experience it was plain to us
that the Count had been using the place pretty freely. We
moved to explore the house, all keeping together in case of
attack, for we knew we had a strong and wily enemy to deal
with, and as yet we did not know whether the Count might not
be in the house.

In the dining room, which lay at the back of the hall,
we found eight boxes of earth. Eight boxes only out of the
nine which we sought! Our work was not over, and would never
be until we should have found the missing box.

First we opened the shutters of the window which looked
out across a narrow stone flagged yard at the blank face of
a stable, pointed to look like the front of a miniature
house. There were no windows in it, so we were not afraid
of being overlooked. We did not lose any time in examining
the chests. With the tools which we had brought with us we
opened them, one by one, and treated them as we had treated
those others in the old chapel. It was evident to us that
the Count was not at present in the house, and we proceeded
to search for any of his effects.

After a cursory glance at the rest of the rooms, from
basement to attic, we came to the conclusion that the dining
room contained any effects which might belong to the Count.
And so we proceeded to minutely examine them. They lay in a
sort of orderly disorder on the great dining room table.

There were title deeds of the Piccadilly house in a
great bundle, deeds of the purchase of the houses at Mile
End and Bermondsey, notepaper, envelopes, and pens and ink.
All were covered up in thin wrapping paper to keep them from
the dust. There were also a clothes brush, a brush and comb,
and a jug and basin. The latter containing dirty water which
was reddened as if with blood. Last of all was a little heap
of keys of all sorts and sizes, probably those belonging to
the other houses.

When we had examined this last find, Lord Godalming and
Quincey Morris taking accurate notes of the various add-
resses of the houses in the East and the South, took with
them the keys in a great bunch, and set out to destroy the
boxes in these places. The rest of us are, with what patience
we can, waiting their return, or the coming of the Count.





CHAPTER 23


DR. SEWARD'S DIARY


3 October.--The time seemed teribly long whilst we were
waiting for the coming of Godalming and Quincey Morris. The
Professor tried to keep our minds active by using them all
the time. I could see his beneficent purpose, by the side
glances which he threw from time to time at Harker. The
poor fellow is overwhelmed in a misery that is appalling to
see. Last night he was a frank, happy-looking man, with
strong, youthful face, full of energy, and with dark brown
hair. Today he is a drawn, haggard old man, whose white
hair matches well with the hollow burning eyes and grief-
written lines of his face. His energy is still intact. In
fact, he is like a living flame. This may yet be his sal-
vation, for if all go well, it will tide him over the des-
pairing period. He will then, in a kind of way, wake again
to the realities o f life. Poor fellow, I thought my own
trouble was bad enough, but his. . .!

The Professor knows this well enough, and is doing his
best to keep his mind active. What he has been saying was,
under the circumstances, of absorbing interest. So well as
I can remember, here it is:

"I have studied, over and over again since they came
into my hands, all the papers relating to this monster, and
the more I have studied, the greater seems the necessity to
utterly stamp him out. All through there are signs of his
advance. Not only of his power, but of his knowledge of it.
As I learned from the researches of my friend Arminius of
Buda-Pesth, he was in life a most wonderful man. Soldier,
statesman, and alchemist. Which latter was the highest
development of the science knowledge of his time. He had a
mighty brain, a learning beyond compare, and a heart that
knew no fear and no remorse. He dared even to attend the
Scholomance, and there was no branch of knowledge of his
time that he did not essay.

"Well, in him the brain powers survived the physical
death. Though it would seem that memory was not all complete.
In some faculties of mind he has been, and is, only a child.
But he is growing, and some things that were childish at the
first are now of man's stature. He is experimenting, and
doing it well. And if it had not been that we have crossed
his path he would be yet, he may be yet if we fail, the
father or furtherer of a new order of beings, whose road must
lead through Death, not Life."

Harker groaned and said, "And this is all arrayed
against my darling! But how is he experimenting? The know-
ledge may help us to defeat him!"

"He has all along, since his coming, been trying his
power, slowly but surely. That big child-brain of his is
working. Well for us, it is as yet, a child-brain. For had
he dared, at the first, to attempt certain things he would
long ago have been beyond our power. However, he means to
succeed, and a man who has centuries before him can afford
to wait and to go slow. Festina lente may well be his motto."

"I fail to understand," said Harker wearily. "Oh, do
be more plain to me! Perhaps grief and trouble are dulling
my brain."

The Professor laid his hand tenderly on his shoulder as
he spoke, "Ah, my child, I will be plain. Do you not see
how, of late, this monster has been creeping into knowledge
experimentally. How he has been making use of the zoophagous
patient to effect his entry into friend John's home. For your
Vampire, though in all afterwards he can come when and how he
will, must at the first make entry only when asked thereto
by an inmate. But these are not his most important experi-
ments. Do we not see how at the first all these so great
boxes were moved by others. He knew not then but that must
be so. But all the time that so great child-brain of his was
growing, and he began to consider whether he might not him-
self move the box. So he began to help. And then, when he
found that this be all right, he try to move them all alone.
And so he progress, and he scatter these graves of him. And
none but he know where they are hidden.

"He may have intend to bury them deep in the ground. So
that only he use them in the night, or at such time as he
can change his form, they do him equal well, and none may
know these are his hiding place! But, my child, do not des-
pair, this knowledge came to him just too late! Already all
of his lairs but one be sterilize as for him. And before the
sunset this shall be so. Then he have no place where he can
move and hide. I delayed this morning that so we might be
sure. Is there not more at stake for us than for him? Then
why not be more careful than him? By my clock it is one hour
and already, if all be well, friend Arthur and Quincey are on
their way to us. Today is our day, and we must go sure, if
slow, and lose no chance. See! There are five of us when
those absent ones return."

Whilst we were speaking we were startled by a knock at
the hall door, the double postman's knock of the telegraph
boy. We all moved out to the hall with one impulse, and Van
Helsing, holding up his hand to us to keep silence, stepped
to the door and opened it. The boy handed in a dispatch.
The Professor closed the door again, and after looking at the
direction, opened it and read aloud.

"Look out for D. He has just now, 12:45, come from
Carfax hurriedly and hastened towards the South. He seems to
be going the round and may want to see you: Mina."

There was a pause, broken by Jonathan Harker's voice,
"Now, God be thanked, we shall soon meet!"

Van Helsing turned to him quickly and said, "God will
act in His own way and time. Do not fear, and do not rejoice
as yet. For what we wish for at the moment may be our own
undoings."

"I care for nothing now," he answered hotly, "except to
wipe out this brute from the face of creation. I would sell
my soul to do it!"

"Oh, hush, hush, my child!" said Van Helsing. "God does
not purchase souls in this wise, and the Devil, though he may
purchase, does not keep faith. But God is merciful and just,
and knows your pain and your devotion to that dear Madam
Mina. Think you, how her pain would be doubled, did she but
hear your wild words. Do not fear any of us, we are all de-
voted to this cause, and today shall see the end. The time
is coming for action. Today this Vampire is limit to the
powers of man, and till sunset he may not change. It will
take him time to arrive here, see it is twenty minutes past
one, and there are yet some times before he can hither come,
be he never so quick. What we must hope for is that my Lord
Arthur and Quincey arrive first."

About half an hour after we had received Mrs. Harker's
telegram, there came a quiet, resolute knock at the hall
door. It was just an ordinary knock, such as is given hourly
by thousands of gentlemen, but it made the Professor's heart
and mine beat loudly. We looked at each other, and together
moved out into the hall. We each held ready to use our var-
ious armaments, the spiritual in the left hand, the mortal
in the right. Van Helsing pulled back the latch, and holding
the door half open, stood back, having both hands ready for
action. The gladness of our hearts must have shown upon our
faces when on the step, close to the door, we saw Lord Godal-
ming and Quincey Morris. They came quickly in and closed the
door behind them, the former saying, as they moved along the
hall.

"It is all right. We found both places. Six boxes in
each and we destroyed them all."

"Destroyed?" asked the Professor.

"For him!" We were silent for a minute, and then Quincey
said, "There's nothing to do but to wait here. If, however,
he doesn't turn up by five o'clock, we must start off. For
it won't do to leave Mrs. Harker alone after sunset."

"He will be here before long now,' said Van Helsing,
who had been consulting his pocketbook. "Nota bene, in
Madam's telegram he went south from Carfax. That means he
went to cross the river, and he could only do so at slack of
tide, which should be something before one o'clock. That he
went south has a meaning for us. He is as yet only suspi-
cious, and he went from Carfax first to the place where he
would suspect interference least. You must have been at Ber-
mondsey only a short time before him. That he is not here
already shows that he went to Mile End next. This took him
some time, for he would then have to be carried over the
river in some way. Believe me, my friends, we shall not have
long to wait now. We should have ready some plan of attack,
so that we may throw away no chance. Hush, there is no time
now. Have all your arms! Be ready!" He held up a warning
hand as he spoke, for we all could hear a key softly inserted
in the lock of the hall door.

I could not but admire, even at such a moment, the way
in which a dominant spirit asserted itself. In all our hunt-
ing parties and adventures in different parts of the world,
Quincey Morris had always been the one to arrange the plan
of action, and Arthur and I had been accustomed to obey him
implicitly. Now, the old habit seemed to be renewed instinc-
tively. With a swift glance around the room, he at once laid
out our plan of attack, and without speaking a word, with a
gesture, placed us each in position. Van Helsing, Harker,
and I were just behind the door, so that when it was opened
the Professor could guard it whilst we two stepped between
the incomer and the door. Godalming behind and Quincey in
front stood just out of sight ready to move in front of the
window. We waited in a suspense that made the seconds pass
with nightmare slowness. The slow, careful steps came along
the hall. The Count was evidently prepared for some surprise,
at least he feared it.

Suddenly with a single bound he leaped into the room.
Winning a way past us before any of us could raise a hand
to stay him. There was something so pantherlike in the
movement, something so unhuman, that it seemed to sober us
all from the shock of his coming. The first to act was Hark-
er, who with a quick movement, threw himself before the door
leading into the room in the front of the house. As the
Count saw us, a horrible sort of snarl passed over his face,
showing the eyeteeth long and pointed. But the evil smile
as quickly passed into a cold stare of lion-like disdain.
His expression again changed as, with a single impulse, we
all advanced upon him. It was a pity that we had not some
better organized plan of attack, for even at the moment I
wondered what we were to do. I did not myself know whether
our lethal weapons would avail us anything.

Harker evidently meant to try the matter, for he had
ready his great Kukri knife and made a fierce and sudden
cut at him. The blow was a powerful one. Only the diabol-
ical quickness of the Count's leap back saved him. A second
less and the trenchant blade had shorn through his coat,
making a wide gap whence a bundle of bank notes and a
stream of gold fell out. The expression of the Count's face
was so hellish, that for a moment I feared for Harker, though
I saw him throw the terrible knife aloft again for another
stroke. Instinctively I moved forward with a protective
impulse, holding the Crucifix and Wafer in my left hand. I
felt a mighty power fly along my arm, and it was without
surprise that I saw the monster cower back before a similar
movement made spontaneously by each one of us. It would be
impossible to describe the expression of hate and baffled
malignity, of anger and hellish rage, which came over the
Count's face. His waxen hue became greenish-yellow by the
contrast of his burning eyes, and the red scar on the fore-
head showed on the pallid skin like a palpitating wound. The
next instant, with a sinuous dive he swept under Harker's
arm, ere his blow could fall, and grasping a handful of the
money from the floor, dashed across the room, threw himself
at the window. Amid the crash and glitter of the falling
glass, he tumbled into the flagged area below. Through the
sound of the shivering glass I could hear the "ting" of the
gold, as some of the sovereigns fell on the flagging.

We ran over and saw him spring unhurt from the ground.
He, rushing up the steps, crossed the flagged yard, and
pushed open the stable door. There he turned and spoke to
us.

"You think to baffle me, you with your pale faces all
in a row, like sheep in a butcher's. You shall be sorry
yet, each one of you! You think you have left me without a
place to rest, but I have more. My revenge is just begun!
I spread it over centuries, and time is on my side. Your
girls that you all love are mine already. And through them
you and others shall yet be mine, my creatures, to do my
bidding and to be my jackals when I want to feed. Bah!"

With a contemptuous sneer, he passed quickly through
the door, and we heard the rusty bolt creak as he fastened
it behind him. A door beyond opened and shut. The first of
us to speak was the Professor. Realizing the difficulty of
following him through the stable, we moved toward the hall.

"We have learnt something. . .much! Notwithstanding
his brave words, he fears us. He fears time, he fears want!
For if not, why he hurry so? His very tone betray him, or
my ears deceive. Why take that money? You follow quick.
You are hunters of the wild beast, and understand it so.
For me, I make sure that nothing here may be of use to him,
if so that he returns."

As he spoke he put the money remaining in his pocket,
took the title deeds in the bundle as Harker had left them,
and swept the remaining things into the open fireplace,
where he set fire to them with a match.

Godalming and Morris had rushed out into the yard, and
Harker had lowered himself from the window to follow the
Count. He had, however, bolted the stable door, and by the
time they had forced it open there was no sign of him. Van
Helsing and I tried to make inquiry at the back of the house.
But the mews was deserted and no one had seen him depart.

It was now late in the afternoon, and sunset was not far
off. We had to recognize that our game was up. With heavy
hearts we agreed with the Professor when he said, "Let us go
back to Madam Mina. Poor, poor dear Madam Mina. All we can
do just now is done, and we can there, at least, protect her.
But we need not despair. There is but one more earth box, and
we must try to find it. When that is done all may yet be well."

I could see that he spoke as bravely as he could to com-
fort Harker. The poor fellow was quite broken down, now and
again he gave a low groan which he could not suppress. He was
thinking of his wife.

With sad hearts we came back to my house, where we
found Mrs. Harker waiting us, with an appearance of cheerful-
ness which did honor to her bravery and unselfishness. When
she saw our faces, her own became as pale as death. For a
second or two her eyes were closed as if she were in secret
prayer.

And then she said cheerfully, "I can never thank you
all enough. Oh, my poor darling!"

As she spoke, she took her husband's grey head in her
hands and kissed it.

"Lay your poor head here and rest it. All will yet be
well, dear! God will protect us if He so will it in His
good intent." The poor fellow groaned. There was no place
for words in his sublime misery.

We had a sort of perfunctory supper together, and I
think it cheered us all up somewhat. It was, perhaps, the
mere animal heat of food to hungry people, for none of us
had eaten anything since breakfast, or the sense of companion-
ship may have helped us, but anyhow we were all less
miserable, and saw the morrow as not altogether without hope.

True to our promise, we told Mrs. Harker everything
which had passed. And although she grew snowy white at times
when danger had seemed to threaten her husband, and red at
others when his devotion to her was manifested she listened
bravely and with calmness. When we came to the part where
Harker had rushed at the Count so recklessly, she clung to
her husband's arm, and held it tight as though her clinging
could protect him from any harm that might come. She said
nothing, however, till the narration was all done, and matters
had been brought up to the present time.

Then without letting go her husband's hand she stood up
amongst us and spoke. Oh, that I could give any idea of the
scene. Of that sweet, sweet, good, good woman in all the rad-
iant beauty of her youth and animation, with the red scar on
her forehead, of which she was conscious, and which we saw
with grinding of our teeth, remembering whence and how it
came. Her loving kindness against our grim hate. Her tender
faith against all our fears and doubting. And we, knowing
that so far as symbols went, she with all her goodness and
purity and faith, was outcast from God.

"Jonathan," she said, and the word sounded like music
on her lips it was so full of love and tenderness, "Jonathan
dear, and you all my true, true friends, I want you to bear
something in mind through all this dreadful time. I know that
you must fight. That you must destroy even as you destroyed
the false Lucy so that the true Lucy might live hereafter.
But it is not a work of hate. That poor soul who has wrought
all this misery is the saddest case of all. Just think what
will be his joy when he, too, is destroyed in his worser part
that his better part may have spiritual immortality. You must
be pitiful to him, too, though it may not hold your hands from
his destruction."

As she spoke I could see her husband's face darken and
draw together, as though the passion in him were shriveling
his being to its core. Instinctively the clasp on his wife's
hand grew closer, till his knuckles looked white. She did
not flinch from the pain which I knew she must have suffered,
but looked at him with eyes that were more appealing than
ever.

As she stopped speaking he leaped to his feet, almost
tearing his hand from hers as he spoke.

"May God give him into my hand just for long enough to
destroy that earthly life of him which we are aiming at. If
beyond it I could send his soul forever and ever to burning
hell I would do it!"

"Oh, hush! Oh, hush in the name of the good God. Don't
say such things, Jonathan, my husband, or you will crush me
with fear and horror. Just think, my dear. . .I have been
thinking all this long, long day of it. . .that. . .
perhaps. . .some day. . . I, too, may need such pity, and
that some other like you, and with equal cause for anger, may
deny it to me! Oh, my husband! My husband, indeed I would
have spared you such a thought had there been another way.
But I pray that God may not have treasured your wild words,
except as the heart-broken wail of a very loving and sorely
stricken man. Oh, God, let these poor white hairs go in ev-
idence of what he has suffered, who all his life has done no
wrong, and on whom so many sorrows have come."

We men were all in tears now. There was no resisting
them, and we wept openly. She wept, too, to see that her
sweeter counsels had prevailed. Her husband flung himself
on his knees beside her, and putting his arms round her, hid
his face in the folds of her dress. Van Helsing beckoned to
us and we stole out of the room, leaving the two loving
hearts alone with their God.

Before they retired the Professor fixed up the room
against any coming of the Vampire, and assured Mrs. Harker
that she might rest in peace. She tried to school herself
to the belief, and manifestly for her husband's sake, tried
to seem content. It was a brave struggle, and was, I think
and believe, not without its reward. Van Helsing had placed
at hand a bell which either of them was to sound in case of
any emergency. When they had retired, Quincey, Godalming,
and I arranged that we should sit up, dividing the night
between us, and watch over the safety of the poor stricken
lady. The first watch falls to Quincey, so the rest of us
shall be off to bed as soon as we can.

Godalming has already turned in, for his is the second
watch. Now that my work is done I, too, shall go to bed.





JONATHAN HARKER'S JOURNAL


3-4 October, close to midnight.--I thought yesterday
would never end. There was over me a yearning for sleep, in
some sort of blind belief that to wake would be to find
things changed, and that any change must now be for the
better. Before we parted, we discussed what our next step
was to be, but we could arrive at no result. All we knew
was that one earth box remained, and that the Count alone
knew where it was. If he chooses to lie hidden, he may baffle
us for years. And in the meantime, the thought is too horr-
ible, I dare not think of it even now. This I know, that if
ever there was a woman who was all perfection, that one is my
poor wronged darling. I loved her a thousand times more for
her sweet pity of last night, a pity that made my own hate of
the monster seem despicable. Surely God will not permit the
world to be the poorer by the loss of such a creature. This
is hope to me. We are all drifting reefwards now, and faith
is our only anchor. Thank God! Mina is sleeping, and sleeping
without dreams. I fear what her dreams might be like, with
such terrible memories to ground them in. She has not been
so calm, within my seeing, since the sunset. Then, for a
while, there came over her face a repose which was like
spring after the blasts of March. I thought at the time that
it was the softness of the red sunset on her face, but some-
how now I think it has a deeper meaning. I am not sleepy
myself, though I am weary. . .weary to death. However, I
must try to sleep. For there is tomorrow to think of, and
there is no rest for me until. . .


Later--I must have fallen asleep, for I was awakened by
Mina, who was sitting up in bed, with a startled look on her
face. I could see easily, for we did not leave the room in
darkness. She had placed a warning hand over my mouth, and
now she whispered in my ear, "Hush! There is someone in the
corridor!" I got up softly, and crossing the room, gently
opened the door.

Just outside, stretched on a mattress, lay Mr. Morris,
wide awake. He raised a warning hand for silence as he whis-
pered to me, "Hush! Go back to bed. It is all right. One
of us will be here all night. We don't mean to take any
chances!"

His look and gesture forbade discussion, so I came back
and told Mina. She sighed and positively a shadow of a smile
stole over her poor, pale face as she put her arms round me
and said softly, "Oh, thank God for good brave men!" With a
sigh she sank back again to sleep. I write this now as I am
not sleepy, though I must try again.


4 October, morning.--Once again during the night I was
wakened by Mina. This time we had all had a good sleep, for
the grey of the coming dawn was making the windows into
sharp oblongs, and the gas flame was like a speck rather than
a disc of light.

She said to me hurriedly, "Go, call the Professor. I
want to see him at once."

"Why?" I asked.

"I have an idea. I suppose it must have come in the
night, and matured without my knowing it. He must hypnotize
me before the dawn, and then I shall be able to speak. Go
quick, dearest, the time is getting close."

I went to the door. Dr. Seward was resting on the matt-
ress, and seeing me, he sprang to his feet.

"Is anything wrong?" he asked, in alarm.

"No," I replied. "But Mina wants to see Dr. Van Helsing
at once."

"I will go," he said, and hurried into the Professor's
room.

Two or three minutes later Van Helsing was in the room
in his dressing gown, and Mr. Morris and Lord Godalming were
with Dr. Seward at the door asking questions. When the Pro-
fessor saw Mina a smile, a positive smile ousted the anxiety
of his face.

He rubbed his hands as he said, "Oh, my dear Madam
Mina, this is indeed a change. See! Friend Jonathan, we
have got our dear Madam Mina, as of old, back to us today!"
Then turning to her, he said cheerfully, "And what am I to
do for you? For at this hour you do not want me for nothing."

"I want you to hypnotize me!" she said. "Do it before
the dawn, for I feel that then I can speak, and speak free-
ly. Be quick, for the time is short!" Without a word he
motioned her to sit up in bed.

Looking fixedly at her, he commenced to make passes in
front of her, from over the top of her head downward, with
each hand in turn. Mina gazed at him fixedly for a few min-
utes, during which my own heart beat like a trip hammer, for
I felt that some crisis was at hand. Gradually her eyes
closed, and she sat, stock still. Only by the gentle heaving
of her bosom could one know that she was alive. The Professor
made a few more passes and then stopped, and I could see that
his forehead was covered with great beads of perspiration.
Mina opened her eyes, but she did not seem the same woman.
There was a far-away look in her eyes, and her voice had a
sad dreaminess which was new to me. Raising his hand to im-
pose silence, the Professor motioned to me to bring the
others in. They came on tiptoe, closing the door behind them,
and stood at the foot of the bed, looking on. Mina appeared
not to see them. The stillness was broken by Van Helsing's
voice speaking in a low level tone which would not break the
current of her thoughts.

"Where are you?" The answer came in a neutral way.

"I do not know. Sleep has no place it can call its own."
For several minutes there was silence. Mina sat rigid, and
the Professor stood staring at her fixedly.

The rest of us hardly dared to breathe. The room was
growing lighter. Without taking his eyes from Mina's face,
Dr. Van Helsing motioned me to pull up the blind. I did so,
and the day seemed just upon us. A red streak shot up, and a
rosy light seemed to diffuse itself through the room. On the
instant the Professor spoke again.

"Where are you now?"

The answer came dreamily, but with intention. It were
as though she were interpreting something. I have heard her
use the same tone when reading her shorthand notes.

"I do not know. It is all strange to me!"

"What do you see?"

"I can see nothing. It is all dark."

"What do you hear?" I could detect the strain in the
Professor's patient voice.

"The lapping of water. It is gurgling by, and little
waves leap. I can hear them on the outside."

"Then you are on a ship?'"

We all looked at each other, trying to glean something
each from the other. We were afraid to think.

The answer came quick, "Oh, yes!"

"What else do you hear?"

"The sound of men stamping overhead as they run about.
There is the creaking of a chain, and the loud tinkle as the
check of the capstan falls into the ratchet."

"What are you doing?"

"I am still, oh so still. It is like death!" The voice
faded away into a deep breath as of one sleeping, and the
open eyes closed again.

By this time the sun had risen, and we were all in the
full light of day. Dr. Van Helsing placed his hands on Mina's
shoulders, and laid her head down softly on her pillow. She
lay like a sleeping child for a few moments, and then, with
a long sigh, awoke and stared in wonder to see us all around
her.

"Have I been talking in my sleep?" was all she said. She
seemed, however, to know the situation without telling, though
she was eager to know what she had told. The Professor re-
peated the conversation, and she said, "Then there is not a
moment to lose. It may not be yet too late!"

Mr. Morris and Lord Godalming started for the door but
the Professor's calm voice called them back.

"Stay, my friends. That ship, wherever it was, was
weighing anchor at the moment in your so great Port of Lon-
don. Which of them is it that you seek? God be thanked that
we have once again a clue, though whither it may lead us we
know not. We have been blind somewhat. Blind after the
manner of men, since we can look back we see what we might
have seen looking forward if we had been able to see what we
might have seen! Alas, but that sentence is a puddle, is it
not? We can know now what was in the Count's mind, when he
seize that money, though Jonathan's so fierce knife put him
in the danger that even he dread. He meant escape. Hear me,
ESCAPE! He saw that with but one earth box left, and a pack
of men following like dogs after a fox, this London was no
place for him. He have take his last earth box on board a
ship, and he leave the land. He think to escape, but no! We
follow him. Tally Ho! As friend Arthur would say when he
put on his red frock! Our old fox is wily. Oh! So wily,
and we must follow with wile. I, too, am wily and I think
his mind in a little while. In meantime we may rest and in
peace, for there are between us which he do not want to pass,
and which he could not if he would. Unless the ship were to
touch the land, and then only at full or slack tide. See, and
the sun is just rose, and all day to sunset is us. Let us
take bath, and dress, and have breakfast which we all need,
and which we can eat comfortably since he be not in the same
land with us."

Mina looked at him appealingly as she asked, "But why
need we seek him further, when he is gone away from us?"

He took her hand and patted it as he replied, "Ask me
nothing as yet. When we have breakfast, then I answer all
questions." He would say no more, and we separated to dress.

After breakfast Mina repeated her question. He looked
at her gravely for a minute and then said sorrowfully, "Be-
cause my dear, dear Madam Mina, now more than ever must we
find him even if we have to follow him to the jaws of Hell!"

She grew paler as she asked faintly, "Why?"

"Because," he answered solemnly, "he can live for cen-
turies, and you are but mortal woman. Time is now to be
dreaded, since once he put that mark upon your throat."

I was just in time to catch her as she fell forward in
a faint.





CHAPTER 24


DR. SEWARD'S PHONOGRAPH DIARY

SPOKEN BY VAN HELSING


This to Jonathan Harker.

You are to stay with your dear Madam Mina. We shall go
to make our search, if I can call it so, for it is not search
but knowing, and we seek confirmation only. But do you stay
and take care of her today. This is your best and most hol-
iest office. This day nothing can find him here.

Let me tell you that so you will know what we four know
already, for I have tell them. He, our enemy, have gone away.
He have gone back to his Castle in Transylvania. I know it so
well, as if a great hand of fire wrote it on the wall. He
have prepare for this in some way, and that last earth box
was ready to ship somewheres. For this he took the money. For
this he hurry at the last, lest we catch him before the sun
go down. It was his last hope, save that he might hide in the
tomb that he think poor Miss Lucy, being as he thought like
him, keep open to him. But there was not of time. When that
fail he make straight for his last resource, his last earth-
work I might say did I wish double entente. He is clever, oh
so clever! He know that his game here was finish. And so he
decide he go back home. He find ship going by the route he
came, and he go in it.

We go off now to find what ship, and whither bound.
When we have discover that, we come back and tell you all.
Then we will comfort you and poor Madam Mina with new hope.
For it will be hope when you think it over, that all is not
lost. This very creature that we pursue, he take hundreds
of years to get so far as London. And yet in one day, when
we know of the disposal of him we drive him out. He is
finite, though he is powerful to do much harm and suffers
not as we do. But we are strong, each in our purpose, and
we are all more strong together. Take heart afresh, dear
husband of Madam Mina. This battle is but begun and in the
end we shall win. So sure as that God sits on high to watch
over His children. Therefore be of much comfort till we
return.

VAN HELSING.





JONATHAN HARKER'S JOURNAL


4 October.--When I read to Mina, Van Helsing's message
in the phonograph, the poor girl brightened up considerably.
Already the certainty that the Count is out of the country
has given her comfort. And comfort is strength to her. For
my own part, now that his horrible danger is not face to face
with us, it seems almost impossible to believe in it. Even my
own terrible experiences in Castle Dracula seem like a long
forgotten dream. Here in the crisp autumn air in the bright
sunlight.

Alas! How can I disbelieve! In the midst of my thought
my eye fell on the red scar on my poor darling's white fore-
head. Whilst that lasts, there can be no disbelief. Mina
and I fear to be idle, so we have been over all the diaries
again and again. Somehow, although the reality seem greater
each time, the pain and the fear seem less. There is some-
thing of a guiding purpose manifest throughout, which is
comforting. Mina says that perhaps we are the instruments
of ultimate good. It may be! I shall try to think as she
does. We have never spoken to each other yet of the future.
It is better to wait till we see the Professor and the
others after their investigations.

The day is running by more quickly than I ever thought
a day could run for me again. It is now three o'clock.





MINA HARKER'S JOURNAL


5 October, 5 P.M.--Our meeting for report. Present:
Professor Van Helsing, Lord Godalming, Dr. Seward, Mr. Quincey
Morris, Jonathan Harker, Mina Harker.

Dr. Van Helsing described what steps were taken during
the day to discover on what boat and whither bound Count
Dracula made his escape.

"As I knew that he wanted to get back to Transylvania,
I felt sure that he must go by the Danube mouth, or by some-
where in the Black Sea, since by that way he come. It was a
dreary blank that was before us. Omme Ignotum pro magnifico.
And so with heavy hearts we start to find what ships leave
for the Black Sea last night. He was in sailing ship, since
Madam Mina tell of sails being set. These not so important
as to go in your list of the shipping in the Times, and so we
go, by suggestion of Lord Godalming, to your Lloyd's, where
are note of all ships that sail, however so small. There we
find that only one Black Sea bound ship go out with the tide.
She is the Czarina Catherine, and she sail from Doolittle's
Wharf for Varna, and thence to other ports and up the Danube.
`So!' said I, `this is the ship whereon is the Count.' So
off we go to Doolittle's Wharf, and there we find a man in an
office. From him we inquire o f the goings of the Czarina
Catherine. He swear much, and he red face and loud of voice,
but he good fellow all the same. And when Quincey give him
something from his pocket which crackle as he roll it up, and
put it in a so small bag which he have hid deep in his cloth-
ing, he still better fellow and humble servant to us. He come
with us, and ask many men who are rough and hot. These be
better fellows too when they have been no more thirsty. They
say much of blood and bloom, and of others which I comprehend
not, though I guess what they mean. But nevertheless they
tell us all things which we want to know.

"They make known to us among them, how last afternoon
at about five o'clock comes a man so hurry. A tall man, thin
and pale, with high nose and teeth so white, and eyes that
seem to be burning. That he be all in black, except that he
have a hat of straw which suit not him or the time. That he
scatter his money in making quick inquiry as to what ship
sails for the Black Sea and for where. Some took him to the
office and then to the ship, where he will not go aboard but
halt at shore end of gangplank, and ask that the captain come
to him. The captain come, when told that he will be pay well,
and though he swear much at the first he agree to term. Then
the thin man go and some one tell him where horse and cart
can be hired. He go there and soon he come again, himself
driving cart on which a great box. This he himself lift down,
though it take several to put it on truck for the ship. He
give much talk to captain as to how and where his box is to
be place. But the captain like it not and swear at him in
many tongues, and tell him that if he like he can come and
see where it shall be. But he say `no,' that he come not yet,
for that he have much to do. Whereupon the captain tell him
that he had better be quick, with blood, for that his ship
will leave the place, of blood, before the turn of the tide,
with blood. Then the thin man smile and say that of course
he must go when he think fit, but he will be surprise if he
go quite so soon. The captain swear again, polyglot, and
the thin man make him bow, and thank him, and say that he
will so far intrude on his kindness as to come aboard before
the sailing. Final the captain, more red than ever, and in
more tongues, tell him that he doesn't want no Frenchmen,
with bloom upon them and also with blood, in his ship, with
blood on her also. And so, after asking where he might pur-
chase ship forms, he departed.

"No one knew where he went `or bloomin' well cared' as
they said, for they had something else to think of, well with
blood again. For it soon became apparent to all that the
Czarina Catherine would not sail as was expected.  A thin mist
began to creep up from the river, and it grew, and grew. Till
soon a dense fog enveloped the ship and all around her. The
captain swore polyglot, very polyglot, polyglot with bloom
and blood, but he could do nothing. The water rose and rose,
and he began to fear that he would lose the tide altogether.
He was in no friendly mood, when just at full tide, the thin
man came up the gangplank again and asked to see where his
box had been stowed. Then the captain replied that he wished
that he and his box, old and with much bloom and blood, were
in hell. But the thin man did not be offend, and went down
with the mate and saw where it was place, and came up and
stood awhile on deck in fog. He must have come off by himself,
for none notice him. Indeed they thought not of him, for soon
the fog begin to melt away, and all was clear again. My
friends of the thirst and the language that was of bloom and
blood laughed, as they told how the captain's swears exceeded
even his usual polyglot, and was more than ever full of pic-
turesque, when on questioning other mariners who were on
movement up and down the river that hour, he found that few
of them had seen any of fog at all, except where it lay round
the wharf. However, the ship went out on the ebb tide, and
was doubtless by morning far down the river mouth. She was
then, when they told us, well out to sea.

"And so, my dear Madam Mina, it is that we have to rest
for a time, for our enemy is on the sea, with the fog at his
command, on his way to the Danube mouth. To sail a ship takes
time, go she never so quick. And when we start to go on land
more quick, and we meet him there. Our best hope is to come
on him when in the box between sunrise and sunset. For then
he can make no struggle, and we may deal with him as we
should. There are days for us, in which we can make ready our
plan. We know all about where he go. For we have seen the
owner of the ship, who have shown us invoices and all papers
that can be. The box we seek is to be landed in Varna, and
to be given to an agent, one Ristics who will there present
his credentials. And so our merchant friend will have done
his part. When he ask if there be any wrong, for that so, he
can telegraph and have inquiry made at Varna, we say `no,'
for what is to be done is not for police or of the customs.
It must be done by us alone and in our own way."

When Dr. Van Helsing had done speaking, I asked him if
he were certain that the Count had remained on board the
ship. He replied, "We have the best proof of that, your own
evidence, when in the hypnotic trance this morning."

I asked him again if it were really necessary that they
should pursue the Count, for oh! I dread Jonathan leaving me,
and I know that he would surely go if the others went. He
answered in growing passion, at first quietly. As he went on,
however, he grew more angry and more forceful, till in the
end we could not but see wherein was at least some of that
personal dominance which made him so long a master amongst
men.

"Yes, it is necessary, necessary, necessary! For your
sake in the first, and then for the sake of humanity. This
monster has done much harm already, in the narrow scope
where he find himself, and in the short time when as yet he
was only as a body groping his so small measure in darkness
and not knowing. All this have I told these others. You, my
dear Madam Mina, will learn it in the phonograph of my friend
John, or in that of your husband. I have told them how the
measure of leaving his own barren land, barren of peoples, and
coming to a new land where life of man teems till they are
like the multitude of standing corn, was the work of cen-
turies. Were another of the Undead, like him, to try to do
what he has done, perhaps not all the centuries of the world
that have been, or that will be, could aid him. With this one,
all the forces of nature that are occult and deep and strong
must have worked together in some wonderous way. The very
place, where he have been alive, Undead for all these cen-
turies, is full of strangeness of the geologic and chemical
world. There are deep caverns and fissures that reach none
know whither. There have been volcanoes, some of whose open-
ings still send out waters of strange properties, and gases
that kill or make to vivify. Doubtless, there is something
magnetic or electric in some of these combinations of occult
forces which work for physical life in strange way, and in
himself were from the first some great qualities. In a hard
and warlike time he was celebrate that he have more iron
nerve, more subtle brain, more braver heart, than any man. In
him some vital principle have in strange way found their ut-
most. And as his body keep strong and grow and thrive, so
his brain grow too. All this without that diabolic aid which
is surely to him. For it have to yield to the powers that
come from, and are, symbolic of good. And now this is what
he is to us. He have infect you, oh forgive me, my dear, that
I must say such, but it is for good of you that I speak. He
infect you in such wise, that even if he do no more, you have
only to live, to live in your own old, sweet way, and so in
time, death, which is of man's common lot and with God's sanc-
tion, shall make you like to him. This must not be! We have
sworn together that it must not. Thus are we ministers of
God's own wish. That the world, and men for whom His Son die,
will not be given over to monsters, whose very existence
would defame Him. He have allowed us to redeem one soul al-
ready, and we go out as the old knights of the Cross to re-
deem more. Like them we shall travel towards the sunrise.
And like them, if we fall, we fall in good cause."

He paused and I said, "But will not the Count take his
rebuff wisely? Since he has been driven from England, will
he not avoid it, as a tiger does the village from which he
has been hunted?"

"Aha!" he said, "your simile of the tiger good, for me,
and I shall adopt him. Your maneater, as they of India call
the tiger who has once tasted blood of the human, care no
more for the other prey, but prowl unceasing till he get him.
This that we hunt from our village is a tiger, too, a manea-
ter, and he never cease to prowl. Nay, in himself he is not
one to retire and stay afar. In his life, his living life, he
go over the Turkey frontier and attack his enemy on his own
ground. He be beaten back, but did he stay? No! He come
again, and again, and again. Look at his persistence and en-
durance. With the child-brain that was to him he have long
since conceive the idea of coming to a great city. What does
he do? He find out the place of all the world most of pro-
mise for him. Then he deliberately set himself down to
prepare for the task. He find in patience just how is his
strength, and what are his powers. He study new tongues. He
learn new social life, new environment of old ways, the pol-
itics, the law, the finance, the science, the habit of a new
land and a new people who have come to be since he was. His
glimpse that he have had, whet his appetite only and enkeen
his desire. Nay, it help him to grow as to his brain. For it
all prove to him how right he was at the first in his sur-
mises. He have done this alone, all alone! From a ruin tomb
in a forgotten land. What more may he not do when the greater
world of thought is open to him. He that can smile at death,
as we know him. Who can flourish in the midst of diseases
that kill off whole peoples. Oh! If such an one was to come
from God, and not the Devil, what a force for good might he
not be in this old world of ours. But we are pledged to set
the world free. Our toil must be in silence, and our efforts
all in secret. For in this enlightened age, when men believe
not even what they see, the doubting of wise men would be his
greatest strength. It would be at once his sheath and his
armor, and his weapons to destroy us, his enemies, who are
willing to peril even our own souls for the safety of one we
love. For the good of mankind, and for the honor and glory of
God."

After a general discussion it was determined that for
tonight nothing be definitely settled. That we should all
sleep on the facts, and try to think out the proper conclu-
sions. Tomorrow, at breakfast, we are to meet again, and
after making our conclusions known to one another, we shall
decide on some definite cause of action. . .

I feel a wonderful peace and rest tonight. It is as if
some haunting presence were removed from me. Perhaps. . .

My surmise was not finished, could not be, for I caught
sight in the mirror of the red mark upon my forehead, and I
knew that I was still unclean.





DR. SEWARD'S DIARY


5 October.--We all arose early, and I think that sleep
did much for each and all of us. When we met at early break-
fast there was more general cheerfulness than any of us had
ever expected to experience again.

It is really wonderful how much resilience there is in
human nature. Let any obstructing cause, no matter what, be
removed in any way, even by death, and we fly back to first
principles of hope and enjoyment. More than once as we sat
around the table, my eyes opened in wonder whether the whole
of the past days had not been a dream. It was only when I
caught sight of the red blotch on Mrs. Harker's forehead that
I was brought back to reality. Even now, when I am gravely
revolving the matter, it is almost impossible to realize that
the cause of all our trouble is still existent. Even Mrs.
Harker seems to lose sight of her trouble for whole spells.
It is only now and again, when something recalls it to her
mind, that she thinks of her terrible scar. We are to meet
here in my study in half an hour and decide on our course of
action. I see only one immediate difficulty, I know it by
instinct rather than reason. We shall all have to speak
frankly. And yet I fear that in some mysterious way poor Mrs.
Harker's tongue is tied. I know that she forms conclusions
of her own, and from all that has been I can guess how brill-
iant and how true they must be. But she will not, or cannot,
give them utterance. I have mentioned this to Van Helsing,
and he and I are to talk it over when we are alone. I suppose
it is some of that horrid poison which has got into her
veins beginning to work. The Count had his own purposes when
he gave her what Van Helsing called "the Vampire's baptism
of blood." Well, there may be a poison that distills itself
out of good things. In an age when the existence of ptomaines
is a mystery we should not wonder at anything! One thing I
know, that if my instinct be true regarding poor Mrs. Harker's
silences, then there is a terrible difficulty, an unknown
danger, in the work before us. The same power that compels
her silence may compel her speech. I dare not think further,
for so I should in my thoughts dishonor a noble woman!


Later.--When the Professor came in, we talked over the
state of things. I could see that he had something on his
mind, which he wanted to say, but felt some hesitancy about
broaching the subject. After beating about the bush a little,
he said, "Friend John, there is something that you and I must
talk of alone, just at the first at any rate. Later, we may
have to take the others into our confidence."

Then he stopped, so I waited. He went on, "Madam Mina,
our poor, dear Madam Mina is changing."

A cold shiver ran through me to find my worst fears
thus endorsed. Van Helsing continued.

"With the sad experience of Miss Lucy, we must this
time be warned before things go too far. Our task is now in
reality more difficult than ever, and this new trouble makes
every hour of the direst importance. I can see the charac-
teristics of the vampire coming in her face. It is now but
very, very slight. But it is to be seen if we have eyes to
notice without prejudge. Her teeth are sharper, and at times
her eyes are more hard. But these are not all, there is to
her the silence now often, as so it was with Miss Lucy. She
did not speak, even when she wrote that which she wished to
be known later. Now my fear is this. If it be that she can,
by our hypnotic trance, tell what the Count see and hear, is
it not more true that he who have hypnotize her first, and
who have drink of her very blood and make her drink of his,
should if he will, compel her mind to disclose to him that
which she know?"

I nodded acquiescence. He went on, "Then, what we must
do is to prevent this. We must keep her ignorant of our in-
tent, and so she cannot tell what she know not. This is a
painful task! Oh, so painful that it heartbreak me to think
of it, but it must be. When today we meet, I must tell her
that for reason which we will not to speak she must not more
be of our council, but be simply guarded by us."

He wiped his forehead, which had broken out in profuse
perspiration at the thought of the pain which he might have
to inflict upon the poor soul already so tortured. I knew
that it would be some sort of comfort to him if I told him
that I also had come to the same conclusion. For at any
rate it would take away the pain of doubt. I told him, and
the effect was as I expected.

It is now close to the time of our general gathering.
Van Helsing has gone away to prepare for the meeting, and
his painful part of it. I really believe his purpose is to
be able to pray alone.


Later.--At the very outset of our meeting a great per-
sonal relief was experienced by both Van Helsing and myself.
Mrs. Harker had sent a message by her husband to say that
she would not join us at present, as she thought it better
that we should be free to discuss our movements without her
presence to embarrass us. The Professor and I looked at
each other for an instant, and somehow we both seemed
relieved. For my own part, I thought that if Mrs. Harker
realized the danger herself, it was much pain as well as
much danger averted. Under the circumstances we agreed, by
a questioning look and answer, with finger on lip, to pre-
serve silence in our suspicions, until we should have been
able to confer alone again. We went at once into our Plan
of Campaign.

Van Helsing roughly put the facts before us first, "The
Czarina Catherine left the Thames yesterday morning. It will
take her at the quickest speed she has ever made at least
three weeks to reach Varna. But we can travel overland to
the same place in three days. Now, if we allow for two days
less for the ship's voyage, owing to such weather influences
as we know that the Count can bring to bear, and if we allow
a whole day and night for any delays which may occur to us,
then we have a margin of nearly two weeks.

"Thus, in order to be quite safe, we must leave here on
17th at latest. Then we shall at any rate be in Varna a day
before the ship arrives, and able to make such preparations
as may be necessary. Of course we shall all go armed, armed
against evil things, spiritual as well as physical."

Here Quincey Morris added, "I understand that the Count
comes from a wolf country, and it may be that he shall get
there before us. I propose that we add Winchesters to our
armament. I have a kind of belief in a Winchester when
there is any trouble of that sort around. Do you remember,
Art, when we had the pack after us at Tobolsk? What wouldn't
we have given then for a repeater apiece!"

"Good!" said Van Helsing, "Winchesters it shall be.
Quincey's head is level at times, but most so when there is
to hunt, metaphor be more dishonor to science than wolves be
of danger to man. In the meantime we can do nothing here.
And as I think that Varna is not familiar to any of us, why
not go there more soon? It is as long to wait here as there.
Tonight and tomorrow we can get ready, and then if all be
well, we four can set out on our journey."

"We four?" said Harker interrogatively, looking from
one to another of us.

"Of course!" answered the Professor quickly. "You must
remain to take care of your so sweet wife!"

Harker was silent for awhile and then said in a hollow
voice, "Let us talk of that part of it in the morning. I
want to consult with Mina."

I thought that now was the time for Van Helsing to
warn him not to disclose our plan to her, but he took no
notice. I looked at him significantly and coughed. For answer
he put his finger to his lips and turned away.





JONATHAN HARKER'S JOURNAL


October, afternoon.--For some time after our meeting
this morning I could not think. The new phases of things
leave my mind in a state of wonder which allows no room for
active thought. Mina's determination not to take any part
in the discussion set me thinking. And as I could not argue
the matter with her, I could only guess. I am as far as
ever from a solution now. The way the others received it,
too puzzled me. The last time we talked of the subject we
agreed that there was to be no more concealment of anything
amongst us. Mina is sleeping now, calmly and sweetly like a
little child. Her lips are curved and her face beams with
happiness. Thank God, there are such moments still for her.


Later.--How strange it all is. I sat watching Mina's
happy sleep, and I came as near to being happy myself as I
suppose I shall ever be. As the evening drew on, and the
earth took its shadows from the sun sinking lower, the si-
lence of the room grew more and more solemn to me.

All at once Mina opened her eyes, and looking at me
tenderly said, "Jonathan, I want you to promise me something
on your word of honor. A promise made to me, but made holily
in God's hearing, and not to be broken though I should go
down on my knees and implore you with bitter tears. Quick,
you must make it to me at once."

"Mina," I said, "a promise like that, I cannot make at
once. I may have no right to make it."

"But, dear one," she said, with such spiritual inten-
sity that her eyes were like pole stars, "it is I who wish
it. And it is not for myself. You can ask Dr. Van Helsing
if I am not right. If he disagrees you may do as you will.
Nay, more if you all agree, later you are absolved from the
promise."

"I promise!"I said, and for a moment she looked suprem-
ely happy. Though to me all happiness for her was denied by
the red scar on her forehead.

She said, "Promise me that you will not tell me any-
thing of the plans formed for the campaign against the Count.
Not by word, or inference, or implication, not at any time
whilst this remains to me!" And she solemnly pointed to the
scar. I saw that she was in earnest, and said solemnly, "I
promise!" and as I said it I felt that from that instant a
door had been shut between us.


Later, midnight.--Mina has been bright and cheerful all
the evening. So much so that all the rest seemed to take
courage, as if infected somewhat with her gaiety. As a re-
sult even I myself felt as if the pall of gloom which weighs
us down were somewhat lifted. We all retired early. Mina
is now sleeping like a little child. It is wonderful thing
that her faculty of sleep remains to her in the midst of her
terrible trouble. Thank God for it, for then at least she
can forget her care. Perhaps her example may affect me as
her gaiety did tonight. I shall try it. Oh! For a dream-
less sleep.

6 October, morning.--Another surprise. Mina woke me
early, about the same time as yesterday, and asked me to
bring Dr. Van Helsing. I thought that it was another occas-
sion for hypnotism, and without question went for the Pro-
fessor. He had evidently expected some such call, for I
found him dressed in his room. His door was ajar, so that
he could hear the opening of the door of our room. He came
at once. As he passed into the room, he asked Mina if the
others might come, too.

"No," she said quite simply, "it will not be necessary.
You can tell them just as well. I must go with you on your
journey."

Dr. Van Helsing was as startled as I was. After a mom-
ent's pause he asked, "But why?"

"You must take me with you. I am safer with you, and
you shall be safer, too."

"But why, dear Madam Mina? You know that your safety
is our solemnest duty. We go into danger, to which you are,
or may be, more liable than any of us from. . .from cir-
cumstances. . .things that have been." He paused embar-
rassed.

As she replied, she raised her finger and pointed to
her forehead. "I know. That is why I must go. I can tell
you now, whilst the sun is coming up. I may not be able
again. I know that when the Count wills me I must go. I
know that if he tells me to come in secret, I must by wile.
By any device to hoodwink, even Jonathan." God saw the look
that she turned on me as she spoke, and if there be indeed a
Recording Angel that look is noted to her ever-lasting honor.
I could only clasp her hand. I could not speak. My emotion
was too great for even the relief of tears.

She went on. "You men are brave and strong. You are
strong in your numbers, for you can defy that which would
break down the human endurance of one who had to guard alone.
Besides, I may be of service, since you can hypnotize me and
so learn that which even I myself do not know."

Dr. Van Helsing said gravely, "Madam Mina, you are, as
always, most wise. You shall with us come. And together we
shall do that which we go forth to achieve."

When he had spoken, Mina's long spell of silence made
me look at her. She had fallen back on her pillow asleep.
She did not even wake when I had pulled up the blind and let
in the sunlight which flooded the room. Van Helsing motioned
to me to come with him quietly. We went to his room, and
within a minute Lord Godalming, Dr. Seward, and Mr. Morris
were with us also.

He told them what Mina had said, and went on. "In the
morning we shall leave for Varna. We have now to deal with
a new factor, Madam Mina. Oh, but her soul is true. It is
to her an agony to tell us so much as she has done. But it
is most right, and we are warned in time. There must be no
chance lost, and in Varna we must be ready to act the in-
stant when that ship arrives."

"What shall we do exactly?" asked Mr. Morris laconically.

The Professor paused before replying, "We shall at the
first board that ship. Then, when we have identified the
box, we shall place a branch of the wild rose on it. This
we shall fasten, for when it is there none can emerge, so
that at least says the superstition. And to superstition
must we trust at the first. It was man's faith in the early,
and it have its root in faith still. Then, when we get the
opportunity that we seek, when none are near to see, we shall
open the box, and. . .and all will be well."

"I shall not wait for any opportunity," said Morris.
"When I see the box I shall open it and destroy the monster,
though there were a thousand men looking on, and if I am to
be wiped out for it the next moment!" I grasped his hand in-
stinctively and found it as firm as a piece of steel. I think
he understood my look. I hope he did.

"Good boy," said Dr. Van Helsing. "Brave boy. Quincey
is all man. God bless him for it. My child, believe me none
of us shall lag behind or pause from any fear. I do but say
what we may do. . .what we must do. But, indeed, indeed we
cannot say what we may do. There are so many things which may
happen, and their ways and their ends are so various that
until the moment we may not say. We shall all be armed, in
all ways. And when the time for the end has come, our effort
shall not be lack. Now let us today put all our affairs in
order. Let all things which touch on others dear to us, and
who on us depend, be complete. For none of us can tell what,
or when, or how, the end may be. As for me, my own affairs
are regulate, and as I have nothing else to do, I shall go
make arrangements for the travel. I shall have all tickets
and so forth for our journey."

There was nothing further to be said, and we parted. I
shall now settle up all my affairs of earth, and be ready for
whatever may come.


Later.--It is done. My will is made, and all complete.
Mina if she survive is my sole heir. If it should not be
so, then the others who have been so good to us shall have
remainder.

It is now drawing towards the sunset. Mina's uneasi-
ness calls my attention to it. I am sure that there is
something on her mind which the time of exact sunset will
reveal. These occasions are becoming harrowing times for us
all. For each sunrise and sunset opens up some new danger,
some new pain, which however, may in God's will be means to
a good end. I write all these things in the diary since my
darling must not hear them now. But if it may be that she
can see them again, they shall be ready. She is calling to me.





CHAPTER 25


DR SEWARD'S DIARY


11 October, Evening.--Jonathan Harker has asked me to
note this, as he says he is hardly equal to the task, and he
wants an exact record kept.

I think that none of us were surprised when we were
asked to see Mrs. Harker a little before the time of sunset.
We have of late come to understand that sunrise and sunset
are to her times of peculiar freedom. When her old self can
be manifest without any controlling force subduing or re-
straining her, or inciting her to action. This mood or
condition begins some half hour or more before actual sun-
rise or sunset, and lasts till either the sun is high, or
whilst the clouds are still aglow with the rays streaming
above the horizon. At first there is a sort of negative
condition, as if some tie were loosened, and then the abso-
lute freedom quickly follows. When, however, the freedom
ceases the change back or relapse comes quickly, preceeded
only by a spell of warning silence.

Tonight, when we met, she was somewhat constrained, and
bore all the signs of an internal struggle. I put it down
myself to her making a violent effort at the earliest
instant she could do so.

A very few minutes, however, gave her complete control
of herself. Then, motioning her husband to sit beside her
on the sofa where she was half reclining, she made the rest
of us bring chairs up close.

Taking her husband's hand in hers, she began, "We are
all here together in freedom, for perhaps the last time! I
know that you will always be with me to the end." This was
to her husband whose hand had, as we could see, tightened
upon her. "In the morning we go out upon our task, and God
alone knows what may be in store for any of us. You are
going to be so good to me to take me with you. I know that
all that brave earnest men can do for a poor weak woman,
whose soul perhaps is lost, no, no, not yet, but is at any
rate at stake, you will do. But you must remember that I am
not as you are. There is a poison in my blood, in my soul,
which may destroy me, which must destroy me, unless some re-
lief comes to us. Oh, my friends, you know as well as I do,
that my soul is at stake. And though I know there is one way
out for me, you must not and I must not take it!" She looked
appealingly to us all in turn, beginning and ending with her
husband.

"What is that way?" asked Van Helsing in a hoarse voice.
"What is that way, which we must not, may not, take?"

"That I may die now, either by my own hand or that of
another, before the greater evil is entirely wrought. I know,
and you know, that were I once dead you could and would set
free my immortal spirit, even as you did my poor Lucy's. Were
death, or the fear of death, the only thing that stood in the
way I would not shrink to die here now, amidst the friends
who love me. But death is not all. I cannot believe that to
die in such a case, when there is hope before us and a bitter
task to be done, is God's will. Therefore, I on my part, give
up here the certainty of eternal rest, and go out into the
dark where may be the blackest things that the world or the
nether world holds!"

We were all silent, for we knew instinctively that this
was only a prelude. The faces of the others were set, and
Harker's grew ashen grey. Perhaps, he guessed better than
any of us what was coming.

She continued, "This is what I can give into the hotch-
pot." I could not but note the quaint legal phrase which
she used in such a place, and with all seriousness. "What
will each of you give? Your lives I know," she went on
quickly, "that is easy for brave men. Your lives are God's,
and you can give them back to Him, but what will you give to
me?" She looked again questionly, but this time avoided her
husband's face. Quincey seemed to understand, he nodded, and
her face lit up. "Then I shall tell you plainly what I want,
for there must be no doubtful matter in this connection be-
tween us now. You must promise me, one and all, even you, my
beloved husband, that should the time come, you will kill me."

"What is that time?" The voice was Quincey's, but it
was low and strained.

"When you shall be convinced that I am so changed that
it is better that I die that I may live. When I am thus
dead in the flesh, then you will, without a moment's delay,
drive a stake through me and cut off my head, or do what-
ever else may be wanting to give me rest!"

Quincey was the first to rise after the pause. He knelt
down before her and taking her hand in his said solemnly,
"I'm only a rough fellow, who hasn't, perhaps, lived as a
man should to win such a distinction, but I swear to you by
all that I hold sacred and dear that, should the time ever
come, I shall not flinch from the duty that you have set us.
And I promise you, too, that I shall make all certain, for
if I am only doubtful I shall take it that the time has come!"

"My true friend!" was all she could say amid her fast-
falling tears, as bending over, she kissed his hand.

"I swear the same, my dear Madam Mina!"said Van Helsing.
"And I!" said Lord Godalming, each of them in turn kneeling
to her to take the oath. I followed, myself.

Then her husband turned to her wan-eyed and with a
greenish pallor which subdued the snowy whiteness of his
hair, and asked, "And must I, too, make such a promise, oh,
my wife?"

"You too, my dearest," she said, with infinite yearning
of pity in her voice and eyes. "You must not shrink. You
are nearest and dearest and all the world to me. Our souls
are knit into one, for all life and all time. Think, dear,
that there have been times when brave men have killed their
wives and their womenkind, to keep them from falling into
the hands of the enemy. Their hands did not falter any the
more because those that they loved implored them to slay
them. It is men's duty towards those whom they love, in
such times of sore trial! And oh, my dear, if it is to be
that I must meet death at any hand, let it be at the hand of
him that loves me best. Dr. Van Helsing, I have not forgot-
ten your mercy in poor Lucy's case to him who loved." She
stopped with a flying blush, and changed her phrase, "to him
who had best right to give her peace. If that time shall
come again, I look to you to make it a happy memory of my
husband's life that it was his loving hand which set me free
from the awful thrall upon me."

"Again I swear!" came the Professor's resonant voice.

Mrs. Harker smiled, positively smiled, as with a sigh of
relief she leaned back and said, "And now one word of warn-
ing, a warning which you must never forget. This time, if it
ever come, may come quickly and unexpectedly, and in such
case you must lose no time in using your opportunity.  At such
a time I myself might be. . .nay! If the time ever come,
shall be, leagued with your enemy against you.

"One more request," she became very solemn as she said
this, "it is not vital and necessary like the other, but I
want you to do one thing for me, if you will."

We all acquiesced, but no one spoke. There was no need
to speak.

"I want you to read the Burial Service." She was inter-
rupted by a deep groan from her husband. Taking his hand in
hers, she held it over her heart, and continued. "You must
read it over me some day. Whatever may be the issue of all
this fearful state of things, it will be a sweet thought to
all or some of us. You, my dearest, will I hope read it, for
then it will be in your voice in my memory forever, come
what may!"

"But oh, my dear one," he pleaded, "death is afar off
from you."

"Nay," she said, holding up a warning hand. "I am
deeper in death at this moment than if the weight of an
earthly grave lay heavy upon me!"

"Oh, my wife, must I read it?" he said, before he began.

"It would comfort me, my husband!" was all she said,
and he began to read when she had got the book ready.

How can I, how could anyone, tell of that strange scene,
its solemnity, its gloom, its sadness, its horror, and withal,
its sweetness. Even a sceptic, who can see nothing but a
travesty of bitter truth in anything holy or emotional, would
have been melted to the heart had he seen that little group
of loving and devoted friends kneeling round that stricken
and sorrowing lady. Or heard the tender passion of her hus-
band's voice, as in tones so broken and emotional that often
he had to pause, he read the simple and beautiful service
from the Burial of the Dead. I cannot go on. . .
words. . .and v-voices. . .f-fail m-me!

She was right in her instinct. Strange as it was,
bizarre as it may hereafter seem even to us who felt its
potent influence at the time, it comforted us much. And the
silence, which showed Mrs. Harker's coming relapse from her
freedom of soul, did not seem so full of despair to any of
us as we had dreaded.





JONATHAN HARKER'S JOURNAL


15 October, Varna.--We left Charing Cross on the morn-
ing of the 12th, got to Paris the same night, and took the
places secured for us in the Orient Express. We traveled
night and day, arriving here at about five o'clock. Lord
Godalming went to the Consulate to see if any telegram had
arrived for him, whilst the rest of us came on to this hotel,
"the Odessus." The journey may have had incidents. I was,
however, too eager to get on, to care for them. Until the
Czarina Catherine comes into port there will be no interest
for me in anything in the wide world. Thank God! Mina is
well, and looks to be getting stronger. Her color is coming
back. She sleeps a great deal. Throughout the journey she
slept nearly all the time. Before sunrise and sunset, how-
ever, she is very wakeful and alert. And it has become a
habit for Van Helsing to hypnotize her at such times. At
first, some effort was needed, and he had to make many passes.
But now, she seems to yield at once, as if by habit, and
scarcely any action is needed. He seems to have power at
these particular moments to simply will, and her thoughts
obey him. He always asks her what she can see and hear.

She answers to the first, "Nothing, all is dark."

And to the second, "I can hear the waves lapping against
the ship, and the water rushing by. Canvas and cordage strain
and masts and yards creak. The wind is high. . .I can
hear it in the shrouds, and the bow throws back the foam."

It is evident that the Czarina Catherine is still at
sea, hastening on her way to Varna. Lord Godalming has just
returned. He had four telegrams, one each day since we start-
ed, and all to the same effect. That the Czarina Catherine had
not been reported to Lloyd's from anywhere. He had arranged
before leaving London that his agent should send him every
day a telegram saying if the ship had been reported. He was
to have a message even if she were not reported, so that he
might be sure that there was a watch being kept at the other
end of the wire.

We had dinner and went to bed early. Tomorrow we are
to see the Vice Consul, and to arrange, if we can, about get-
ting on board the ship as soon as she arrives. Van Helsing
says that our chance will be to get on the boat between sun-
rise and sunset. The Count, even if he takes the form of a
bat, cannot cross the running water of his own volition, and
so cannot leave the ship. As he dare not change to man's
form without suspicion, which he evidently wishes to avoid,
he must remain in the box. If, then, we can come on board
after sunrise, he is at our mercy, for we can open the box
and make sure of him, as we did of poor Lucy, before he
wakes. What mercy he shall get from us all will not count
for much. We think that we shall not have much trouble with
officials or the seamen. Thank God! This is the country
where bribery can do anything, and we are well supplied with
money. We have only to make sure that the ship cannot come
into port between sunset and sunrise without our being
warned, and we shall be safe. Judge Moneybag will settle this
case, I think!


16 October.--Mina's report still the same. Lapping
waves and rushing water, darkness and favoring winds. We are
evidently in good time, and when we hear of the Czarina Cat-
herine we shall be ready. As she must pass the Dardanelles
we are sure to have some report.


17 October.--Everything is pretty well fixed now, I
think, to welcome the Count on his return from his tour. Go-
dalming told the shippers that he fancied that the box sent
aboard might contain something stolen from a friend of his,
and got a half consent that he might open it at his own risk.
The owner gave him a paper telling the Captain to give him
every facility in doing whatever he chose on board the ship,
and also a similar authorization to his agent at Varna. We
have seen the agent, who was much impressed with Godalming's
kindly manner to him, and we are all satisfied that whatever
he can do to aid our wishes will be done.

We have already arranged what to do in case we get the
box open. If the Count is there, Van Helsing and Seward
will cut off his head at once and drive a stake through his
heart. Morris and Godalming and I shall prevent interfer-
ence, even if we have to use the arms which we shall have
ready. The Professor says that if we can so treat the
Count's body, it will soon after fall into dust. In such
case there would be no evidence against us, in case any
suspicion of murder were aroused. But even if it were not,
we should stand or fall by our act, and perhaps some day
this very script may be evidence to come between some of us
and a rope. For myself, I should take the chance only too
thankfully if it were to come. We mean to leave no stone
unturned to carry out our intent. We have arranged with
certain officials that the instant the Czarina Catherine is
seen, we are to be informed by a special messenger.


24 October.--A whole week of waiting. Daily telegrams
to Godalming, but only the same story. "Not yet reported."
Mina's morning and evening hypnotic answer is unvaried. Lap-
ping waves, rushing water, and creaking masts.




TELEGRAM, OCTOBER 24TH
RUFUS SMITH, LLOYD'S, LONDON, TO LORD GODALMING, CARE OF

H. B. M. VICE CONSUL, VARNA

"Czarina Catherine reported this morning from Dardanelles."

DR. SEWARD'S DIARY


25 October.--How I miss my phonograph! To write a
diary with a pen is irksome to me! But Van Helsing says I
must. We were all wild with excitement yesterday when Godal-
ming got his telegram from Lloyd's. I know now what men feel
in battle when the call to action is heard. Mrs. Harker, alone
of our party, did not show any signs of emotion.  After all, it
is not strange that she did not, for we took special care not
to let her know anything about it, and we all tried not to
show any excitement when we were in her presence. In old days
she would, I am sure, have noticed, no matter how we might
have tried to conceal it. But in this way she is greatly
changed during the past three weeks. The lethargy grows upon
her, and though she seems strong and well, and is getting
back some of her color, Van Helsing and I are not satisfied.
We talk of her often. We have not, however, said a word to
the others. It would break poor Harker's heart, certainly
his nerve, if he knew that we had even a suspicion on the
subject. Van Helsing examines, he tells me, her teeth very
carefully, whilst she is in the hypnotic condition, for he
says that so long as they do not begin to sharpen there is
no active danger of a change in her. If this change should
come, it would be necessary to take steps! We both know what
those steps would have to be, though we do not mention our
thoughts to each other. We should neither of us shrink from
the task, awful though it be to contemplate. "Euthanasia" is
an excellent and a comforting word! I am grateful to whoever
invented it.

It is only about 24 hours' sail from the Dardanelles to
here, at the rate the Czarina Catherine has come from London.
She should therefore arrive some time in the morning, but as
she cannot possibly get in before noon, we are all about to
retire early. We shall get up at one o'clock, so as to be
ready.


25 October, Noon.--No news yet of the ship's arrival.
Mrs. Harker's hypnotic report this morning was the same as
usual, so it is possible that we may get news at any moment.
We men are all in a fever of excitement, except Harker, who
is calm. His hands are cold as ice, and an hour ago I found
him whetting the edge of the great Ghoorka knife which he
now always carries with him. It will be a bad lookout for the
Count if the edge of that "Kukri" ever touches his throat,
driven by that stern, ice-cold hand!

Van Helsing and I were a little alarmed about Mrs.
Harker today. About noon she got into a sort of lethargy
which we did not like. Although we kept silence to the
others, we were neither of us happy about it. She had been
restless all the morning, so that we were at first glad to
know that she was sleeping. When, however, her husband
mentioned casually that she was sleeping so soundly that he
could not wake her, we went to her room to see for ourselves.
She was breathing naturally and looked so well and peaceful
that we agreed that the sleep was better for her than any-
thing else. Poor girl, she has so much to forget that it is
no wonder that sleep, if it brings oblivion to her, does her
good.


Later.--Our opinion was justified, for when after a
refreshing sleep of some hours she woke up, she seemed
brighter and better than she had been for days. At sunset
she made the usual hypnotic report. Wherever he may be in
the Black Sea, the Count is hurrying to his destination. To
his doom, I trust!



26 October.--Another day and no tidings of the Czarina
Catherine. She ought to be here by now. That she is still
journeying somewhere is apparent, for Mrs. Harker's hypnotic
report at sunrise was still the same. It is possible that
the vessel may be lying by, at times, for fog. Some of the
steamers which came in last evening reported patches of fog
both to north and south of the port. We must continue our
watching, as the ship may now be signalled any moment.


27 October, Noon.--Most strange. No news yet of the
ship we wait for. Mrs. Harker reported last night and this
morning as usual. "Lapping waves and rushing water," though
she added that "the waves were very faint." The telegrams
from London have been the same, "no further report." Van
Helsing is terribly anxious, and told me just now that he
fears the Count is escaping us.

He added significantly, "I did not like that lethargy
of Madam Mina's. Souls and memories can do strange things
during trance." I was about to as k him more, but Harker
just then came in, and he held up a warning hand. We must
try tonight at sunset to make her speak more fully when in
her hypnotic state.

28 October.--Telegram. Rufus Smith, London, to Lord
Godalming, care H. B. M. Vice Consul, Varna

"Czarina Catherine reported entering Galatz at one
o'clock today."




DR. SEWARD'S DIARY


28 October.--When the telegram came announcing the
arrival in Galatz I do not think it was such a shock to any
of us as might have been expected. True, we did not know
whence, or how, or when, the bolt would come. But I think we
all expected that something strange would happen. The day of
arrival at Varna made us individually satisfied that things
would not be just as we had expected. We only waited to learn
where the change would occur. None the less, however, it was
a surprise. I suppose that nature works on such a hopeful
basis that we believe against ourselves that things will be
as they ought to be, not as we should know that they will be.
Transcendentalism is a beacon to the angels, even if it be a
will-o'-the-wisp to man. Van Helsing raised his hand over
his head for a moment, as though in remonstrance with the
Almighty. But he said not a word, and in a few seconds stood
up with his face sternly set.

Lord Godalming grew very pale, and sat breathing heav-
ily. I was myself half stunned and looked in wonder at one
after another. Quincey Morris tightened his belt with that
quick movement which I knew so well. In our old wandering
days it meant "action." Mrs. Harker grew ghastly white, so
that the scar on her forehead seemed to burn, but she folded
her hands meekly and looked up in prayer. Harker smiled,
actually smiled, the dark, bitter smile of one who is without
hope, but at the same time his action belied his words, for
his hands instinctively sought the hilt of the great Kukri
knife and rested there.

"When does the next train start for Galatz?" said Van
Helsing to us generally.

"At 6:30 tomorrow morning!" We all started, for the
answer came from Mrs. Harker.

"How on earth do you know?" said Art.

"You forget, or perhaps you do not know, though Jona-
than does and so does Dr. Van Helsing, that I am the train
fiend. At home in Exeter I always used to make up the time
tables, so as to be helpful to my husband. I found it so
useful sometimes, that I always make a study of the time
tables now. I knew that if anything were to take us to
Castle Dracula we should go by Galatz, or at any rate
through Bucharest, so I learned the times very carefully.
Unhappily there are not many to learn, as the only train
tomorrow leaves as I say."

"Wonderful woman!" murmured the Professor.

"Can't we get a special?" asked Lord Godalming.

Van Helsing shook his head, "I fear not. This land is
very different from yours or mine. Even if we did have a
special, it would probably not arrive as soon as our regular
train. Moreover, we have something to prepare. We must think.
Now let us organize. You, friend Arthur, go to the train and
get the tickets and arrange that all be ready for us to go
in the morning. Do you, friend Jonathan, go to the agent of
the ship and get from him letters to the agent in Galatz,
with authority to make a search of the ship just as it was
here. Quincey Morris, you see the Vice Consul, and get his
aid with his fellow in Galatz and all he can do to make our
way smooth, so that no times be lost when over the Danube.
John will stay with Madam Mina and me, and we shall consult.
For so if time be long you may be delayed. And it will not
matter when the sun set, since I am here with Madam to make
report."

"And I," said Mrs. Harker brightly, and more like her
old self than she had been for many a long day, "shall try
to be of use in all ways, and shall think and write for you
as I used to do. Something is shifting from me in some
strange way, and I feel freer than I have been of late!"

The three younger men looked happier at the moment as
they seemed to realize the significance of her words. But
Van Helsing and I, turning to each other, met each a grave
and troubled glance. We said nothing at the time, however.

When the three men had gone out to their tasks Van Hel-
sing asked Mrs. Harker to look up the copy of the diaries and
find him the part of Harker's journal at the Castle. She went
away to get it.

When the door was shut upon her he said to me, "We
mean the same! Speak out!"

"Here is some change. It is a hope that makes me sick,
for it may deceive us."

"Quite so. Do you know why I asked her to get the
manuscript?"

"No!" said I, "unless it was to get an opportunity of
seeing me alone."

"You are in part right, friend John, but only in part.
I want to tell you something. And oh, my friend, I am
taking a great, a terrible, risk. But I believe it is right.
In the moment when Madam Mina said those words that arrest
both our understanding, an inspiration came to me. In the
trance of three days ago the Count sent her his spirit to
read her mind. Or more like he took her to see him in his
earth box in the ship with water rushing, just as it go free
at rise and set of sun. He learn then that we are here, for
she have more to tell in her open life with eyes to see ears
to hear than he, shut as he is, in his coffin box. Now he
make his most effort to escape us.  At present he want her not.

"He is sure with his so great knowledge that she will
come at his call. But he cut her off, take her, as he can
do, out of his own power, that so she come not to him. Ah!
There I have hope that our man brains that have been of man
so long and that have not lost the grace of God, will come
higher than his child-brain that lie in his tomb for centur-
ies, that grow not yet to our stature, and that do only work
selfish and therefore small. Here comes Madam Mina. Not a
word to her of her trance! She knows it not, and it would
overwhelm her and make despair just when we want all her
hope, all her courage, when most we want all her great brain
which is trained like man's brain, but is of sweet woman and
have a special power which the Count give her, and which he
may not take away altogether, though he think not so. Hush!
Let me speak, and you shall learn. Oh, John, my friend, we
are in awful straits. I fear, as I never feared before. We
can only trust the good God. Silence! Here she comes!"

I thought that the Professor was going to break down
and have hysterics, just as he had when Lucy died, but with a
great effort he controlled himself and was at perfect
nervous poise when Mrs. Harker tripped into the room, bright
and happy looking and, in the doing of work, seemingly for-
getful of her misery. As she came in, she handed a number of
sheets of typewriting to Van Helsing. He looked over them
gravely, his face brightening up as he read.

Then holding the pages between his finger and thumb he
said, "Friend John, to you with so much experience already,
and you too, dear Madam Mina, that are young, here is a
lesson. Do not fear ever to think. A half thought has been
buzzing often in my brain, but I fear to let him loose his
wings. Here now, with more knowledge, I go back to where
that half thought come from and I find that he be no half
thought at all. That be a whole thought, though so young that
he is not yet strong to use his little wings. Nay, like the
`Ugly Duck' of my friend Hans Andersen, he be no duck thought
at all, but a big swan thought that sail nobly on big wings,
when the time come for him to try them. See I read here what
Jonathan have written.

"That other of his race who, in a later age, again and
again, brought his forces over The Great River into Turkey
Land, who when he was beaten back, came again, and again,
and again, though he had to come alone from the bloody field
where his troops were being slaughtered, since he knew that
he alone could ultimately triumph.

"What does this tell us? Not much? No! The Count's
child thought see nothing, therefore he speak so free. Your
man thought see nothing. My man thought see nothing, till
just now. No! But there comes another word from some one
who speak without thought because she, too, know not what it
mean, what it might mean. Just as there are elements which
rest, yet when in nature's course they move on their way and
they touch, the pouf! And there comes a flash of light,
heaven wide, that blind and kill and destroy some. But that
show up all earth below for leagues and leagues. Is it not
so? Well, I shall explain. To begin, hav e you ever study
the philosophy of crime? `Yes' and `No.' You, John, yes,
for it is a study of insanity. You, no, Madam Mina, for
crime touch you not, not but once. Still, your mind works
true, and argues not a particulari ad universale. There is
this peculiarity in criminals. It is so constant, in all
countries and at all times, that even police, who know not
much from philosophy, come to know it empirically, that it
is. That is to be empiric. The criminal always work at one
crime, that is the true criminal who seems predestinate to
crime, and who will of none other. This criminal has not full
man brain. He is clever and cunning and resourceful, but he
be not of man stature as to brain. He be of child brain in
much. Now this criminal of ours is pre-destinate to crime
also. He, too, have child brain, and it is of the child to
do what he have done. The little bird, the little fish, the
little animal learn not by principle, but empirically. And
when he learn to do, then there is to him the ground to start
from to do more. `Dos pou sto,' said Archimedes. `Give me
a fulcrum, and I shall move the world!' To do once, is the
fulcrum whereby child brain become man brain. And until he
have the purpose to do more, he continue to do the same again
every time, just as he have done before! Oh, my dear, I see
that your eyes are opened, and that to you the lightning
flash show all the leagues, "for Mrs. Harker began to clap her
hands and her eyes sparkled.

He went on, "Now you shall speak. Tell us two dry men
of science what you see with those so bright eyes." He took
her hand and held it whilst he spoke. His finger and thumb
closed on her pulse, as I thought instinctively and uncon-
sciously, as she spoke.

"The Count is a criminal and of criminal type. Nordau
and Lombroso would so classify him, and qua criminal he is
of an imperfectly formed mind. Thus, in a difficulty he has
to seek resource in habit. His past is a clue, and the one
page of it that we know, and that from his own lips, tells
that once before, when in what Mr. Morris would call a`tight
place,' he went back to his own country from the land he had
tried to invade, and thence, without losing purpose, prepared
himself for a new effort. He came again better equipped for
his work, and won. So he came to London to invade a new land.
He was beaten, and when all hope of success was lost, and his
existence in danger, he fled back over the sea to his home.
Just as formerly he had fled back over the Danube from
Turkey Land."

"Good, good! Oh, you so clever lady!" said Van Helsing,
enthusiastically, as he stooped and kissed her hand.  A moment
later he said to me, as calmly as though we had been having
a sick room consultation, "Seventy-two only, and in all this
excitement. I have hope."

Turning to her again, he said with keen expectation,
"But go on. Go on! There is more to tell if you will. Be
not afraid. John and I know. I do in any case, and shall
tell you if you are right. Speak, without fear!"

"I will try to. But you will forgive me if I seem too
egotistical."

"Nay! Fear not, you must be egotist, for it is of you
that we think."

"Then, as he is criminal he is selfish. And as his
intellect is small and his action is based on selfishness, he
confines himself to one purpose. That purpose is remorseless.
As he fled back over the Danube, leaving his forces to be cut
to pieces, so now he is intent on being safe, careless of all.
So his own selfishness frees my soul somewhat from the terr-
ible power which he acquired over me on that dreadful night.
I felt it! Oh, I felt it! Thank God, for His great mercy!
My soul is freer than it has been since that awful hour. And
all that haunts me is a fear lest in some trance or dream he
may have used my knowledge for his ends."

The Professor stood up, "He has so used your mind, and
by it he has left us here in Varna, whilst the ship that
carried him rushed through enveloping fog up to Galatz,
where, doubtless, he had made preparation for escaping from
us. But his child mind only saw so far. And it may be that
as ever is in God's Providence, the very thing that the evil
doer most reckoned on for his selfish good, turns out to be
his chiefest harm. The hunter is taken in his own snare, as
the great Psalmist says. For now that he think he is free
from every trace of us all, and that he has escaped us with
so many hours to him, then his selfish child brain will
whisper him to sleep. He think, too, that as he cut himself
off from knowing your mind, there can be no knowledge of him
to you. There is where he fail! That terrible baptism of
blood which he give you makes you free to go to him in
spirit, as you have as yet done in your times of freedom,
when the sun rise and set. At such times you go by my voli-
tion and not by his. And this power to good of you and
others, you have won from your suffering at his hands. This
is now all more precious that he know it not, and to guard
himself have even cut himself off from his knowledge of our
where. We, however, are not selfish, and we believe that God
is with us through all this blackness, and these many dark
hours. We shall follow him, and we shall not flinch. Even if
we peril ourselves that we become like him. Friend John,
this has been a great hour, and it have done much to advance
us on our way. You must be scribe and write him all down, so
that when the others return from their work you can give it
to them, then they shall know as we do."

And so I have written it whilst we wait their return,
and Mrs. Harker has written with the typewriter all since
she brought the MS to us.





CHAPTER 26


DR. SEWARD'S DIARY


29 October.--This is written in the train from Varna to
Galatz. Last night we all assembled a little before the
time of sunset. Each of us had done his work as well as he
could, so far as thought, and endeavor, and opportunity go,
we are prepared for the whole of our journey, and for our
work when we get to Galatz. When the usual time came round
Mrs. Harker prepared herself for her hypnotic effort, and
after a longer and more serious effort on the part of Van
Helsing than has been usually necessary, she sank into the
trance. Usually she speaks on a hint, but this time the
Professor had to ask her questions, and to ask them pretty
resolutely, before we could learn anything. At last her
answer came.

"I can see nothing. We are still. There are no waves
lapping, but only a steady swirl of water softly running
against the hawser. I can hear men's voices calling, near
and far, and the roll and creak of oars in the rowlocks. A
gun is fired somewhere, the echo of it seems far away. There
is tramping of feet overhead, and ropes and chains are drag-
ged along. What is this? There is a gleam of light. I can
feel the air blowing upon me."

Here she stopped. She had risen, as if impulsively,
from where she lay on the sofa, and raised both her hands,
palms upwards, as if lifting a weight. Van Helsing and I
looked at each other with understanding. Quincey raised his
eyebrows slightly and looked at her intently, whilst Harker's
hand instinctively closed round the hilt of his Kukri. There
was a long pause. We all knew that the time when she could
speak was passing, but we felt that it was useless to say
anything.

Suddenly she sat up, and as she opened her eyes said
sweetly, "Would none of you like a cup of tea? You must all
be so tired!"

We could only make her happy, and so acqueisced. She
bustled off to get tea. When she had gone Van Helsing said,
"You see, my friends. He is close to land. He has left his
earth chest. But he has yet to get on shore. In the night
he may lie hidden somewhere, but if he be not carried on
shore, or if the ship do not touch it, he cannot achieve the
land. In such case he can, if it be in the night, change his
form and jump or fly on shore, then, unless he be carried he
cannot escape. And if he be carried, then the customs men
may discover what the box contain. Thus, in fine, if he
escape not on shore tonight, or before dawn, there will be
the whole day lost to him. We may then arrive in time. For
if he escape not at night we shall come on him in daytime,
boxed up and at our mercy. For he dare not be his true self,
awake and visible, lest he be discovered."

There was no more to be said, so we waited in patience
until the dawn, at which time we might learn more from Mrs.
Harker.

Early this morning we listened, with breathless anxiety,
for her response in her trance. The hypnotic stage was even
longer in coming than before, and when it came the time re-
maining until full sunrise was so short that we began to
despair. Van Helsing seemed to throw his whole soul into the
effort. At last, in obedience to his will she made reply.

"All is dark. I hear lapping water, level with me, and
some creaking as of wood on wood." She paused, and the red
sun shot up. We must wait till tonight.

And so it is that we are travelling towards Galatz in
an agony of expectation. We are due to arrive between two
and three in the morning. But already, at Bucharest, we
are three hours late, so we cannot possibly get in till well
after sunup. Thus we shall have two more hypnotic messages
from Mrs. Harker! Either or both may possibly throw more
light on what is happening.


Later.--Sunset has come and gone. Fortunately it came
at a time when there was no distraction. For had it occurred
whilst we were at a station, we might not have secured the
necessary calm and isolation. Mrs. Harker yielded to the
hypnotic influence even less readily than this morning. I
am in fear that her power of reading the Count's sensations
may die away, just when we want it most. It seems to me that
her imagination is beginning to work. Whilst she has been
in the trance hitherto she has confined herself to the simp-
lest of facts. If this goes on it may ultimately mislead us.
If I thought that the Count's power over her would die away
equally with her power of knowledge it would be a happy
thought. But I am afraid that it may not be so.

When she did speak, her words were enigmatical, "Some-
thing is going out. I can feel it pass me like a cold wind.
I can hear, far off, confused sounds, as of men talking in
strange tongues, fierce falling water, and the howling of
wolves." She stopped and a shudder ran through her, in-
creasing in intensity for a few seconds, till at the end,
she shook as though in a palsy. She said no more, even in
answer to the Professor's imperative questioning. When she
woke from the trance, she was cold, and exhausted, and lan-
guid, but her mind was all alert. She could not remember
anything, but asked what she had said. When she was told,
she pondered over it deeply for a long time and in silence.


30 October, 7 A.M.--We are near Galatz now, and I may
not have time to write later. Sunrise this morning was anx-
iously looked for by us all. Knowing of the increasing diff-
iculty of procuring the hypnotic trance, Van Helsing began
his passes earlier than usual. They produced no effect, how-
ever, until the regular time, when she yielded with a still
greater difficulty, only a minute before the sun rose. The
Professor lost no time in his questioning.

Her answer came with equal quickness, "All is dark. I
hear water swirling by, level with my ears, and the creaking
of wood on wood. Cattle low far off. There is another sound,
a queer one like. . ." She stopped and grew white, and
whiter still.

"Go on, go on! Speak, I command you!" said Van Helsing
in an agonized voice. At the same time there was despair in
his eyes, for the risen sun was reddening even Mrs. Harker's
pale face. She opened her eyes, and we all started as she
said, sweetly and seemingly with the utmost unconcern.

"Oh, Professor, why ask me to do what you know I can't?
I don't remember anything." Then, seeing the look of amaze-
ment on our faces, she said, turning from one to the other
with a troubled look, "What have I said? What have I done?
I know nothing, only that I was lying here, half asleep, and
heard you say `go on! speak, I command you!' It seemed so
funny to hear you order me about, as if I were a bad child!"

"Oh, Madam Mina," he said, sadly, "it is proof, if proof
be needed, of how I love and honor you, when a word for your
good, spoken more earnest than ever, can seem so strange be-
cause it is to order her whom I am proud to obey!"

The whistles are sounding. We are nearing Galatz. We are
on fire with anxiety and eagerness.

MINA HARKER'S JOURNAL


30 October.--Mr. Morris took me to the hotel where our
rooms had been ordered by telegraph, he being the one who
could best be spared, since he does not speak any foreign
language. The forces were distributed much as they had been
at Varna, except that Lord Godalming went to the Vice Consul,
as his rank might serve as an immediate guarantee of some
sort to the official, we being in extreme hurry. Jonathan and
the two doctors went to the shipping agent to learn partic-
ulars of the arrival of the Czarina Catherine.


Later.--Lord Godalming has returned. The Consul is away,
and the Vice Consul sick. So the routine work has been
attended to by a clerk. He was very obliging, and offered to
do anything in his power.





JONATHAN HARKER'S JOURNAL


30 October.--At nine o'clock Dr. Van Helsing, Dr. Seward,
and I called on Messrs. Mackenzie & Steinkoff, the agents of
the London firm of Hapgood. They had received a wire from
London, in answer to Lord Godalming's telegraphed request,
asking them to show us any civility in their power. They were
more than kind and courteous, and took us at once on board
the Czarina Catherine, which lay at anchor out in the river
harbor. There we saw the Captain, Donelson by name, who told
us of his voyage. He said that in all his life he had never
had so favorable a run.

"Man!" he said, "but it made us afeard, for we expect
it that we should have to pay for it wi' some rare piece o'
ill luck, so as to keep up the average. It's no canny to run
frae London to the Black Sea wi' a wind ahint ye, as though
the Deil himself were blawin' on yer sail for his ain pur-
pose. An' a' the time we could no speer a thing. Gin we were
nigh a ship, or a port, or a headland, a fog fell on us and
travelled wi' us, till when after it had lifted and we looked
out, the deil a thing could we see. We ran by Gibraltar wi'
oot bein' able to signal. An' til we came to the Dardanelles
and had to wait to get our permit to pass, we never were
within hail o' aught. At first I inclined to slack off sail
and beat about till the fog was lifted. But whiles, I thocht
that if the Deil was minded to get us into the Black Sea
quick, he was like to do it whether we would or no. If we had
a quick voyage it would be no to our miscredit wi'the owners,
or no hurt to our traffic, an' the Old Mon who had served his
ain purpose wad be decently grateful to us for no hinderin'
him."

This mixture of simplicity and cunning, of superstition
and commercial reasoning, aroused Van Helsing, who said, "Mine
friend, that Devil is more clever than he is thought by some,
and he know when he meet his match!"

The skipper was not displeased with the compliment, and
went on, "When we got past the Bosphorus the men began to
grumble. Some o' them, the Roumanians, came and asked me to
heave overboard a big box which had been put on board by a
queer lookin' old man just before we had started frae London.
I had seen them speer at the fellow, and put out their twa
fingers when they saw him, to guard them against the evil eye.
Man! but the supersteetion of foreigners is pairfectly ri-
deeculous! I sent them aboot their business pretty quick,
but as just after a fog closed in on us I felt a wee bit as
they did anent something, though I wouldn't say it was again
the big box. Well, on we went, and as the fog didn't let up
for five days I joost let the wind carry us, for if the Deil
wanted to get somewheres, well, he would fetch it up a'reet.
An' if he didn't, well, we'd keep a sharp lookout anyhow.
Sure eneuch, we had a fair way and deep water all the time.
And two days ago, when the mornin' sun came through the fog,
we found ourselves just in the river opposite Galatz. The
Roumanians were wild, and wanted me right or wrong to take
out the box and fling it in the river. I had to argy wi'
them aboot it wi' a handspike. An' when the last o' them
rose off the deck wi' his head in his hand, I had convinced
them that, evil eye or no evil eye, the property and the
trust of my owners were better in my hands than in the river
Danube. They had, mind ye, taken the box on the deck ready to
fling in, and as it was marked Galatz via Varna, I thocht I'd
let it lie till we discharged in the port an' get rid o't
althegither. We didn't do much clearin' that day, an' had
to remain the nicht at anchor. But in the mornin', braw an'
airly, an hour before sunup, a man came aboard wi' an order,
written to him from England, to receive a box marked for one
Count Dracula. Sure eneuch the matter was one ready to his
hand. He had his papers a' reet, an' gla d I was to be rid
o' the dam' thing, for I was beginnin' masel' to feel uneasy
at it. If the Deil did have any luggage aboord the ship, I'm
thinkin' it was nane ither than that same!"

"What was the name of the man who took it?" asked Dr.
Van Helsing with restrained eagerness.

"I'll be tellin' ye quick!" he answered, and stepping
down to his cabin, produced a receipt signed "Immanuel
Hildesheim." Burgen-strasse 16 was the address. We found
out that this was all the Captain knew, so with thanks we
came away.

We found Hildesheim in his office, a Hebrew of rather
the Adelphi Theatre type, with a nose like a sheep, and a
fez. His arguments were pointed with specie, we doing the
punctuation, and with a little bargaining he told us what
he knew. This turned out to be simple but important. He
had received a letter from Mr. de Ville of London, telling
him to receive, if possible before sunrise so as to avoid
customs, a box which would arrive at Galatz in the Czarina
Catherine. This he was to give in charge to a certain
Petrof Skinsky, who dealt with the Slovaks who traded down
the river to the port. He had been paid for his work by an
English bank note, which had been duly cashed for gold at
the Danube International Bank. When Skinsky had come to him,
he had taken him to the ship and handed over the box, so as
to save parterage. That was all he knew.

We then sought for Skinsky, but were unable to find him.
One of his neighbors, who did not seem to bear him any affec-
tion, said that he had gone away two days before, no one knew
whither. This was corroborated by his landlord, who had re-
ceived by messenger the key of the house together with the
rent due, in English money. This had been between ten and
eleven o'clock last night. We were at a standstill again.

Whilst we were talking one came running and breathless-
ly gasped out that the body of Skinsky had been found inside
the wall of the churchyard of St. Peter, and that the throat
had been torn open as if by some wild animal. Those we had
been speaking with ran off to see the horror, the women cry-
ing out. "This is the work of a Slovak!" We hurried away
lest we should have been in some way drawn into the affair,
and so detained.

As we came home we could arrive at no definite conclu-
sion. We were all convinced that the box was on its way, by
water, to somewhere, but where that might be we would have to
discover. With heavy hearts we came home to the hotel to Mina.

When we met together, the first thing was to consult as
to taking Mina again into our confidence. Things are getting
desperate, and it is at least a chance, though a hazardous
one. As a preliminary step, I was released from my promise
to her.





MINA HARKER'S JOURNAL


30 October, evening.--They were so tired and worn out
and dispirited that there was nothing to be done till they
had some rest, so I asked them all to lie down for half an
hour whilst I should enter everything up to the moment. I
feel so grateful to the man who invented the "Traveller's"
typewriter, and to Mr. Morris for getting this one for me.
I should have felt quite astray doing the work if I had to
write with a pen. . .

It is all done. Poor dear, dear Jonathan, what he must
have suffered, what he must be suffering now. He lies on the
sofa hardly seeming to breathe, and his whole body appears in
collapse. His brows are knit. His face is drawn with pain.
Poor fellow, maybe he is thinking, and I can see his face all
wrinkled up with the concentration of his thoughts. Oh! if I
could only help at all. I shall do what I can.

I have asked Dr. Van Helsing, and he has got me all the
papers that I have not yet seen. Whilst they are resting, I
shall go over all carefully, and perhaps I may arrive at some
conclusion. I shall try to follow the Professor's example,
and think without prejudice on the facts before me. . .

I do believe that under God's providence I have made a
discovery. I shall get the maps and look over them.

I am more than ever sure that I am right. My new con-
clusion is ready, so I shall get our party together and read
it. They can judge it. It is well to be accurate, and
every minute is precious.





MINA HARKER'S MEMORANDUM

(ENTERED IN HER JOURNAL)


Ground of inquiry.--Count Dracula's problem is to get
back to his own place.

(a) He must be brought back by some one. This is
evident. For had he power to move himself as he wished he
could go either as man, or wolf, or bat, or in some other
way. He evidently fears discovery or interference, in the
state of helplessness in which he must be, confined as he is
between dawn and sunset in his wooden box.

(b) How is he to be taken?--Here a process of exclu-
sions may help us. By road, by rail, by water?

1. By Road.--There are endless difficulties, especi-
ally in leaving the city.

(x) There are people. And people are curious, and
investigate. A hint, a surmise, a doubt as to what might be
in the box, would destroy him.

(y) There are, or there may be, customs and octroi
officers to pass.

(z) His pursuers might follow. This is his highest
fear. And in order to prevent his being betrayed he has
repelled, so far as he can, even his victim, me!

2. By Rail.--There is no one in charge of the box. It
would have to take its chance of being delayed, and delay
would be fatal, with enemies on the track. True, he might
escape at night. But what would he be, if left in a strange
place with no refuge that he could fly to? This is not what
he intends, and he does not mean to risk it.

3. By Water.--Here is the safest way, in one respect,
but with most danger in another. On the water he is power-
less except at night. Even then he can only summon fog and
storm and snow and his wolves. But were he wrecked, the
living water would engulf him, helpless, and he would indeed
be lost. He could have the vessel drive to land, but if it
were unfriendly land, wherein he was not free to move, his
position would still be desperate.

We know from the record that he was on the water, so
what we have to do is to ascertain what water.

The first thing is to realize exactly what he has done
as yet. We may, then, get a light on what his task is to be.

Firstly.--We must differentiate between what he did in
London as part of his general plan of action, when he was
pressed for moments and had to arrange as best he could.

Secondly we must see, as well as we can surmise it from
the facts we know of, what he has done here.

As to the first, he evidently intended to arrive at
Galatz, and sent invoice to Varna to deceive us lest we
should ascertain his means of exit from England. His immed-
iate and sole purpose then was to escape. The proof of this,
is the letter of instructions sent ot Immanuel Hildesheim to
clear and take away the box before sunrise. There is also the
instruction to Petrof Skinsky. These we must only guess at,
but there must have been some letter or message, since Skin-
sky came to Hildesheim.

That, so far, his plans were successful we know. The
Czarina Catherine made a phenomenally quick journey. So much
so that Captain Donelson's suspicions were aroused. But his
superstition united with his canniness played the Count's
game for him, and he ran with his favoring wind through fogs
and all till he brought up blindfold at Galatz. That the
Count's arrangements were well made, has been proved. Hilde-
sheim cleared the box, took it off, and gave it to Skinsky.
Skinsky took it, and here we lose the trail. We only know
that the box is somewhere on the water, moving along. The
customs and the octroi, if there be any, have been avoided.

Now we come to what the Count must have done after his
arrival, on land, at Galatz.

The box was given to Skinsky before sunrise. At sun-
rise the Count could appear in his own form. Here, we ask
why Skinsky was chosen at all to aid in the work? In my
husband's diary, Skinsky is mentioned as dealing with the
Slovaks who trade down the river to the port. And the man's
remark, that the murder was the work of a Slovak, showed the
general feeling against his class. The Count wanted iso-
lation.

My surmise is this, that in London the Count decided
to get back to his castle by water, as the most safe and
secret way. He was brought from the castle by Szgany, and
probably they delivered their cargo to Slovaks who took the
boxes to Varna, for there they were shipped to London. Thus
the Count had knowledge of the persons who could arrange
this service. When the box was on land, before sunrise or
after sunset, he came out from his box, met Skinsky and
instructed him what to do as to arranging the carriage of
the box up some river. When this was done, and he knew that
all was in train, he blotted out his traces, as he thought,
by murdering his agent.

I have examined the map and find that the river most
suitable for the Slovaks to have ascended is either the
Pruth or the Sereth. I read in the typescript that in my
trance I heard cows low and water swirling level with my
ears and the creaking of wood. The Count in his box, then,
was on a river in an open boat, propelled probably either
by oars or poles, for the banks are near and it is working
against stream. There would be no such if floating down
stream.

Of course it may not be either the Sereth or the Pruth,
but we may possibly investigate further. Now of these two,
the Pruth is the more easily navigated, but the Sereth is,
at Fundu, joined by the Bistritza which runs up round the
Borgo Pass. The loop it makes is manifestly as close to
Dracula's castle as can be got by water.


MINA HARKER'S JOURNAL--CONTINUED


When I had done reading, Jonathan took me in his arms
and kissed me. The others kept shaking me by both hands,
and Dr. Van Helsing said, "Our dear Madam Mina is once more
our teacher. Her eyes have been where we were blinded. Now
we are on the track once again, and this time we may succeed.
Our enemy is at his most helpless. And if we can come on him
by day, on the water, our task will be over. He has a start,
but he is powerless to hasten, as he may not leave this box
lest those who carry him may suspect. For them to suspect
would be to prompt them to throw him in the stream where he
perish. This he knows, and will not. Now men, to our Council
of War, for here and now, we must plan what each and all
shall do."

"I shall get a steam launch and follow him," said Lord
Godalming.

"And I, horses to follow on the bank lest by chance he
land," said Mr. Morris.

"Good!" said the Professor, "both good. But neither
must go alone. There must be force to overcome force if
need be. The Slovak is strong and rough, and he carries
rude arms." All the men smiled, for amongst them they
carried a small arsenal.

Said Mr. Morris, "I have brought some Winchesters.
They are pretty handy in a crowd, and there may be wolves.
The Count, if you remember, took some other precautions. He
made some requisitions on others that Mrs. Harker could not
quite hear or understand. We must be ready at all points."

Dr. Seward said, "I think I had better go with Quincey.
We have been accustomed to hunt together, and we two, well
armed, will be a match for whatever may come along. You must
not be alone, Art. It may be necessary to fight the Slovaks,
and a chance thrust, for I don't suppose these fellows carry
guns, would undo all our plans. There must be no chances, this
time. We shall not rest until the Count's head and body
have been separated, and we are sure that he cannot rein-
carnate."

He looked at Jonathan as he spoke, and Jonathan looked
at me. I could see that the poor dear was torn about in his
mind. Of course he wanted to be with me. But then the boat
service would, most likely, be the one which would destroy
the. . .the. . .Vampire. (Why did I hesitate to write the word?)

He was silent awhile, and during his silence Dr. Van
Helsing spoke, "Friend Jonathan, this is to you for twice
reasons. First, because you are young and brave and can
fight, and all energies may be needed at the last. And again
that it is your right to destroy him. That, which has wrought
such woe to you and yours. Be not afraid for Madam Mina. She
will be my care, if I may. I am old. My legs are not so
quick to run as once. And I am not used to ride so long or
to pursue as need be, or to fight with lethal weapons. But
I can be of other service. I can fight in other way. And I
can die, if need be, as well as younger men. Now let me say
that what I would is this. While you, my Lord Godalming and
friend Jonathan go in your so swift little steamboat up the
river, and whilst John and Quincey guard the bank where per-
chance he might be landed, I will take Madam Mina right into
the heart of the enemy's country. Whilst the old fox is tied
in his box, floating on the running stream whence he cannot
escape to land, where he dares not raise the lid of his cof-
fin box lest his Slovak carriers should in fear leave him to
perish, we shall go in the track where Jonathan went, from
Bistritz over the Borgo, and find our way to the Castle of
Dracula. Here, Madam Mina's hypnotic power will surely help,
and we shall find our way, all dark and unknown otherwise,
after the first sunrise when we are near that fateful place.
There is much to be done, and other places to be made sanc-
tify, so that that nest of vipers be obliterated."

Here Jonathan interrupted him hotly, "Do you mean to
say, Professor Van Helsing, that you would bring Mina, in
her sad case and tainted as she is with that devil's illness,
right into the jaws of his deathtrap? Not for the world! Not
for Heaven or Hell!"

He became almost speechless for a minute, and then went
on, "Do you know what the place is? Have you seen that awful
den of hellish infamy, with the very moonlight alive with
grisly shapes, and ever speck of dust that whirls in the wind
a devouring monster in embryo? Have you felt the Vampire's
lips upon your throat?"

Here he turned to me, and as his eyes lit on my fore-
head he threw up his arms with a cry, "Oh, my God, what have
we done to have this terror upon us?" and he sank down on
the sofa in a collapse of misery.

The Professor's voice, as he spoke in clear, sweet tones,
which seemed to vibrate in the air, calmed us all.

"Oh, my friend, it is because I would save Madam Mina
from that awful place that I would go. God forbid that I
should take her into that place. There is work, wild work,
to be done before that place can be purify. Remember that
we are in terrible straits. If the Count escape us this
time, and he is strong and subtle and cunning, he may choose
to sleep him for a century, and then in time our dear one,"
he took my hand, "would come to him to keep him company, and
would be as those others that you, Jonathan, saw. You have
told us of their gloating lips. You heard their ribald laugh
as they clutched the moving bag that the Count threw to them.
You shudder, and well may it be. Forgive me that I make you
so much pain, but it is necessary. My friend, is it not a
dire need for that which I am giving, possibly my life? If
it, were that any one went into that place to stay, it is I
who would have to go to keep them company."

"Do as you will," said Jonathan, with a sob that shook
him all over, "we are in the hands of God!"


Later.--Oh, it did me good to see the way that these
brave men worked. How can women help loving men when they
are so earnest, and so true, and so brave! And, too, it
made me think of the wonderful power of money! What can it
not do when basely used. I felt so thankful that Lord Godal-
ming is rich, and both he and Mr. Morris, who also has plenty
of money, are willing to spend it so freely. For if they did
not, our little expedition could not start, either so promptly
or so well equipped, as it will within another hour. It is
not three hours since it was arranged what part each of us
was to do. And now Lord Godalming and Jonathan have a lovely
steam launch, with steam up ready to start at a moment's
notice. Dr. Seward and Mr. Morris have half a dozen good
horses, well appointed. We have all the maps and appliances
of various kinds that can be had. Professor Van Helsing and
I are to leave by the 11:40 train tonight for Veresti, where
we are to get a carriage to drive to the Borgo Pass. We are
bringing a good deal of ready money, as we are to buy a carr-
iage and horses. We shall drive ourselves, for we have no
one whom we can trust in the matter. The Professor knows
something of a great many languages, so we shall get on all
right. We have all got arms, even for me a large bore revol-
ver. Jonathan would not be happy unless I was armed like
the rest. Alas! I cannot carry one arm that the rest do,
the scar on my forehead forbids that. Dear Dr. Van Helsing
comforts me by telling me that I am fully armed as there may
be wolves. The weather is getting colder every hour, and
there are snow flurries which come and go as warnings.


Later.--It took all my courage to say goodby to my dar-
ling. We may never meet again. Courage, Mina! The Pro-
fessor is looking at you keenly. His look is a warning.
There must be no tears now, unless it may be that God will
let them fall in gladness.





JONATHAN HARKER'S JOURNAL


30 October, night.--I am writing this in the light from
the furnace door of the steam launch. Lord Godalming is
firing up. He is an experienced hand at the work, as he has
had for years a launch of his own on the Thames, and another
on the Norfolk Broads. Regarding our plans, we finally de-
cided that Mina's guess was correct, and that if any waterway
was chosen for the Count's escape back to his Castle, the
Sereth and then the Bistritza at its junction, would be the
one. We took it, that somewhere about the 47th degree, north
latitude, would be the place chosen for crossing the country
between the river and the Carpathians. We have no fear in
running at good speed up the river at night. There is plenty
of water, and the banks are wide enough apart to make steam-
ing, even in the dark, easy enough. Lord Godalming tells me
to sleep for a while, as it is enough for the present for one
to be on watch. But I cannot sleep, how can I with the terr-
ible danger hanging over my darling, and her going out into
that awful place. . .

My only comfort is that we are in the hands of God. Only
for that faith it would be easier to die than to live, and so
be quit of all the trouble. Mr. Morris and Dr. Seward were
off on their long ride before we started. They are to keep up
the right bank, far enough off to get on higher lands where
they can see a good stretch of river and avoid the following
of its curves. They have, for the first stages, two men to
ride and lead their spare horses, four in all, so as not to
excite curiosity. When they dismiss the men, which shall be
shortly, they shall themselves look after the horses. It may
be necessary for us to join forces. If so they can mount our
whole party. One of the saddles has a moveable horn, and can
be easily adapted for Mina, if required.

It is a wild adventure we are on. Here, as we are
rushing along through the darkness, with the cold from the
river seeming to rise up and strike us, with all the myster-
ious voices of the night around us, it all comes home. We seem
to be drifting into unknown places and unknown ways. Into a
whole world of dark and dreadful things. Godalming is shut-
ting the furnace door. . .


31 October.--Still hurrying along. The day has come, and
Godalming is sleeping. I am on watch. The morning is bitterly
cold, the furnace heat is grateful, though we have heavy fur
coats. As yet we have passed only a few open boats, but none
of them had on board any box or package of anything like the
size of the one we seek. The men were scared every time we
turned our electric lamp on them, and fell on their knees and
prayed.


1 November, evening.--No news all day. We have found
nothing of the kind we seek. We have now passed into the
Bistritza, and if we are wrong in our surmise our chance is
gone. We have overhauled every boat, big and little. Early
this morning, one crew took us for a Government boat, and
treated us accordingly. We saw in this a way of smoothing
matters, so at Fundu, where the Bistritza runs into the Sereth,
we got a Roumanian flag which we now fly conspicuously. With
every boat which we have over-hauled since then this trick
has succeeded. We have had every deference shown to us, and
not once any objection to whatever we chose to ask or do.
Some of the Slovaks tell us that a big boat passed them, go-
ing at more than usual speed as she had a double crew on
board. This was before they came to Fundu, so they could not
tell us whether the boat turned into the Bistritza or contin-
ued on up the Sereth. At Fundu we could not hear of any such
boat, so she must have passed there in the night. I am feel-
ing very sleepy. The cold is perhaps beginning to tell upon
me, and nature must have rest some time. Godalming insists
that he shall keep the first watch. God bless him for all
his goodness to poor dear Mina and me.


2 November, morning.--It is broad daylight. That good
fellow would not wake me. He says it would have been a sin
to, for I slept peacefully and was forgetting my trouble. It
seems brutally selfish to me to have slept so long, and let
him watch all night, but he was quite right. I am a new man
this morning. And, as I sit here and watch him sleeping, I
can do all that is necessary both as to minding the engine,
steering, and keeping watch. I can feel that my strength
and energy are coming back to me. I wonder where Mina is
now, and Van Helsing. They should have got to Veresti about
noon on Wednesday. It would take them some time to get the
carriage and horses. So if they had started and travelled
hard, they would be about now at the Borgo Pass. God guide
and help them! I am afraid to think what may happen. If we
could only go faster. But we cannot. The engines are throb-
bing and doing their utmost. I wonder how Dr. Seward and Mr.
Morris are getting on. There seem to be endless streams run-
ning down the mountains into this river, but as none of them
are very large, at present, at all events, though they are
doubtless terrible in winter and when the snow melts, the
horsemen may not have met much obstruction. I hope that be-
fore we get to Strasba we may see them. For if by that time
we have not overtaken the Count, it may be necessary to take
counsel together what to do next.





DR. SEWARD'S DIARY


2 November.--Three days on the road. No news, and no
time to write it if there had been, for every moment is
precious. We have had only the rest needful for the horses.
But we are both bearing it wonderfully. Those adventurous
days of ours are turning up useful. We must push on. We
shall never feel happy till we get the launch in sight again.


3 Novenber.--We heard at Fundu that the launch had gone
up the Bistritza. I wish it wasn't so cold. There are signs
of snow coming. And if it falls heavy it will stop us. In
such case we must get a sledge and go on, Russian fashion.

4 Novenber.--Today we heard of the launch having been
detained by an accident when trying to force a way up the
rapids. The Slovak boats get up all right, by aid of a rope
and steering with knowledge. Some went up only a few hours
before. Godalming is an amateur fitter himself, and evidently
it was he who put the launch in trim again.

Finally, they got up the rapids all right, with local
help, and are off on the chase afresh. I fear that the boat
is not any better for the accident, the peasantry tell us
that after she got upon smooth water again, she kept stopping
every now and again so long as she was in sight. We must push
on harder than ever. Our help may be wanted soon.





MINA HARKER'S JOURNAL


31 October.--Arrived at Veresti at noon. The Professor
tells me that this morning at dawn he could hardly hypnotize
me at all, and that all I could say was, "dark and quiet."
He is off now buying a carriage and horses. He says that he
will later on try to buy additional horses, so that we may
be able to change them on the way. We have something more
than 70 miles before us. The country is lovely, and most
interesting. If only we were under different conditions,
how delightful it would be to see it all. If Jonathan and I
were driving through it alone what a pleasure it would be. To
stop and see people, and learn something of their life, and
to fill our minds and memories with all the color and pictur-
esqueness of the whole wild, beautiful country and the quaint
people! But, alas!


Later.--Dr. Van Helsing has returned. He has got the
carriage and horses. We are to have some dinner, and to
start in an hour. The landlady is putting us up a huge
basket of provisions. It seems enough for a company of
soldiers. The Professor encourages her, and whispers to me
that it may be a week before we can get any food again. He
has been shopping too, and has sent home such a wonderful
lot of fur coats and wraps, and all sorts of warm things.
There will not be any chance of our being cold.

We shall soon be off. I am afraid to think what may
happen to us. We are truly in the hands of God. He alone
knows what may be, and I pray Him, with all the strength of
my sad and humble soul, that He will watch over my beloved
husband. That whatever may happen, Jonathan may know that
I loved him and honored him more than I can say, and that my
latest and truest thought will be always for him.





CHAPTER 27


MINA HARKER'S JOURNAL


1 November.--All day long we have travelled, and at a
good speed. The horses seem to know that they are being
kindly treated, for they go willingly their full stage at
best speed. We have now had so many changes and find the same
thing so constantly that we are encouraged to think that the
journey will be an easy one. Dr. Van Helsing is laconic, he
tells the farmers that he is hurrying to Bistritz, and pays
them well to make the exchange of horses. We get hot soup,
or coffee, or tea, and off we go. It is a lovely country.
Full of beauties of all imaginable kinds, and the people are
brave, and strong, and simple, and seem full of nice quali-
ties. They are very, very superstitious. In the first house
where we stopped, when the woman who served us saw the scar
on my forehead, she crossed herself and put out two fingers
towards me, to keep off the evil eye. I believe they went to
the trouble of putting an extra amount of garlic into our
food, and I can't abide garlic. Ever since then I have taken
care not to take off my hat or veil, and so have escaped
their suspicions. We are travelling fast, and as we have no
driver with us to carry tales, we go ahead of scandal. But
I daresay that fear of the evil eye will follow hard behind
us all the way. The Professor seems tireless. All day he
would not take any rest, though he made me sleep for a long
spell.  At sunset time he hypnotized me, and he says I answered
as usual, "darkness, lapping water and creaking wood." So our
enemy is still on the river. I am afraid to think of Jona-
than, but somehow I have now no fear for him, or for myself.
I write this whilst we wait in a farmhouse for the horses to
be ready. Dr. Van Helsing is sleeping. Poor dear, he looks
very tired and old and grey, but his mouth is set as firmly
as a conqueror's. Even in his sleep he is intense with res-
olution. When we have well started I must make him rest
whilst I drive. I shall tell him that we have days before us,
and he must not break down when most of all his strength
will be needed. . .All is ready. We are off shortly.


2 November, morning.--I was successful, and we took
turns driving all night. Now the day is on us, bright though
cold. There is a strange heaviness in the air. I say heav-
iness for want of a better word. I mean that it oppresses us
both. It is very cold, and only our warm furs keep us com-
fortable. At dawn Van Helsing hypnotized me. He says I ans-
wered "darkness, creaking wood and roaring water," so the
river is changing as they ascend. I do hope that my darling
will not run any chance of danger, more than need be, but we
are in God's hands.


2 November, night.--All day long driving. The country
gets wilder as we go, and the great spurs of the Carpathians,
which at Veresti seemed so far from us and so low on the
horizon, now seem to gather round us and tower in front. We
both seem in good spirits. I think we make an effort each to
cheer the other, in the doing so we cheer ourselves. Dr. Van
Helsing says that by morning we shall reach the Borgo Pass.
The houses are very few here now, and the Professor says that
the last horse we got will have to go on with us, as we may
not be able to change. He got two in addition to the two we
changed, so that now we have a rude four-in-hand. The dear
horses are patient and good, and they give us no trouble. We
are not worried with other travellers, and so even I can
drive. We shall get to the Pass in daylight. We do not want
to arrive before. So we take it easy, and have each a long
rest in turn. Oh, what will tomorrow bring to us? We go to
seek the place where my poor darling suffered so much. God
grant that we may be guided aright, and that He will deign to
watch over my husband and those dear to us both, and who are
in such deadly peril.  As for me, I am not worthy in His sight.
Alas! I am unclean to His eyes, and shall be until He may
deign to let me stand forth in His sight as one of those who
have not incurred His wrath.





MEMORANDUM BY ABRAHAM VAN HELSING


4 November.--This to my old and true friend John Seward,
M. D., of Purefleet, London, in case I may not see him. It
may explain. It is morning, and I write by a fire which all
the night I have kept alive, Madam Mina aiding me. It is cold,
cold. So cold that the grey heavy sky is full of snow, which
when it falls will settle for all winter as the ground is
hardening to receive it. It seems to have affected Madam Mina.
She has been so heavy of head all day that she was not like
herself. She sleeps, and sleeps, and sleeps! She who is usual
so alert, have done literally nothing all the day. She even
have lost her appetite. She make no entry into her little
diary, she who write so faithful at every pause. Something
whisper to me that all is not well. However, tonight she is
more vif. Her long sleep all day have refresh and restore her,
for now she is all sweet and bright as ever. At sunset I try
to hypnotize her, but alas! with no effect. The power has
grown less and less with each day, and tonight it fail me
altogether. Well, God's will be done, whatever it may be,
and whithersoever it may lead!

Now to the historical, for as Madam Mina write not in
her stenography, I must, in my cumbrous old fashion, that so
each day of us may not go unrecorded.

We got to the Borgo Pass just after sunrise yesterday
morning. When I saw the signs of the dawn I got ready for
the hypnotism. We stopped our carriage, and got down so
that there might be no disturbance. I made a couch with
furs, and Madam Mina, lying down, yield herself as usual, but
more slow and more short time than ever, to the hypnotic
sleep. As before, came the answer, "darkness and the swirl-
ing of water." Then she woke, bright and radiant and we go
on our way and soon reach the Pass. At this time and place,
she become all on fire with zeal. Some new guiding power be
in her manifested, for she point to a road and say, "This is
the way."

"How know you it?" I ask.

"Of course I know it,' she answer, and with a pause,
add, "Have not my Jonathan travelled it and wrote of his
travel?"

At first I think somewhat strange, but soon I see that
there be only one such byroad. It is used but little, and
very different from the coach road from the Bukovina to Bis-
tritz, which is more wide and hard, and more of use.

So we came down this road. When we meet other ways,
not always were we sure that they were roads at all, for
they be neglect and light snow have fallen, the horses know
and they only. I give rein to them, and they go on so patient.
By and by we find all the things which Jonathan have note in
that wonderful diary of him. Then we go on for long, long
hours and hours. At the first, I tell Madam Mina to sleep.
She try, and she succeed. She sleep all the time, till at the
last, I feel myself to suspicious grow, and attempt to wake
her. But she sleep on, and I may not wake her though I try.
I do not wish to try too hard lest I harm her. For I know
that she have suffer much, and sleep at times be all-in-all
to her. I think I drowse myself, for all of sudden I feel
guilt, as though I have done something. I find myself bolt
up, with the reins in my hand, and the good horses go along
jog, jog, just as ever. I look down and find Madam Mina still
asleep. It is now not far off sunset time, and over the snow
the light of the sun flow in big yellow flood, so that we
throw great long shadow on where the mountain rise so steep.
For we are going up, and up, and all is oh, so wild and
rocky, as though it were the end of the world.

Then I arouse Madam Mina. This time she wake with not
much trouble, and then I try to put her to hypnotic sleep.
But she sleep not, being as though I were not. Still I try
and try, till all at once I find her and myself in dark, so
I look round, and find that the sun have gone down. Madam
Mina laugh, and I turn and look at her. She is now quite
awake, and look so well as I never saw her since that night
at Carfax when we first enter the Count's house. I am amaze,
and not at ease then. But she is so bright and tender and
thoughtful for me that I forget all fear. I light a fire,
for we have brought supply of wood with us, and she prepare
food while I undo the horses and set them, tethered in shel-
ter, to feed. Then when I return to the fire she have my
supper ready. I go to help her, but she smile, and tell me
that she have eat already. That she was so hungry that she
would not wait. I like it not, and I have grave doubts. But
I fear to affright her, and so I am silent of it. She help
me and I eat alone, and then we wrap in fur and lie beside
the fire, and I tell her to sleep while I watch.  But present-
ly I forget all of watching. And when I sudden remember that
I watch, I find her lying quiet, but awake, and looking at
me with so bright eyes. Once, twice more the same occur, and
I get much sleep till before morning. When I wake I try to
hypnotize her, but alas! Though she shut her eyes obedient,
she may not sleep. The sun rise up, and up, and up, and then
sleep come to her too late, but so heavy that she will not
wake. I have to lift her up, and place her sleeping in the
carriage when I have harnessed the horses and made all ready.
Madam still sleep, and she look in her sleep more healthy and
more redder than before. And I like it not. And I am afraid,
afraid, afraid! I am afraid of all things, even to think but
I must go on my way. The stake we play for is life and death,
or more than these, and we must not flinch.


5 November, morning.--Let me be accurate in everything,
for though you and I have seen some strange things together,
you may at the first think that I, Van Helsing, am mad. That
the many horrors and the so long strain on nerves has at the
last turn my brain.

All yesterday we travel, always getting closer to the
mountains, and moving into a more and more wild and desert
land. There are great, frowning precipices and much falling
water, and Nature seem to have held sometime her carnival.
Madam Mina still sleep and sleep. And though I did have hun-
ger and appeased it, I could not waken her, even for food. I
began to fear that the fatal spell of the place was upon her,
tainted as she is with that Vampire baptism. "Well," said I
to myself, "if it be that she sleep all the day, it shall
also be that I do not sleep at night." As we travel on the
rough road, for a road of an ancient and imperfect kind there
was, I held down my head and slept.

Again I waked with a sense of guilt and of time passed,
and found Madam Mina still sleeping, and the sun low down.
But all was indeed changed. The frowning mountains seemed
further away, and we were near the top of a steep rising
hill, on summit of which was such a castle as Jonathan tell
of in his diary. At once I exulted and feared. For now, for
good or ill, the end was near.

I woke Madam Mina, and again tried to hypnotize her, but
alas! unavailing till too late. Then, ere the great dark came
upon us, for even after down sun the heavens reflected the
gone sun on the snow, and all was for a time in a great twi-
light. I took out the horses and fed them in what shelter I
could. Then I make a fire, and near it I make Madam Mina,
now awake and more charming than ever, sit comfortable amid
her rugs. I got ready food, but she would not eat, simply
saying that she had not hunger. I did not press her, knowing
her unavailingness. But I myself eat, for I must needs now
be strong for all. Then, with the fear on me of what might
be, I drew a ring so big for her comfort, round where Madam
Mina sat. And over the ring I passed some of the wafer, and
I broke it fine so that all was well guarded. She sat still
all the time, so still as one dead. And she grew whiter and
even whiter till the snow was not more pale, and no word she
said. But when I drew near, she clung to me, and I could
know that the poor soul shook her from head to feet with a
tremor that was pain to feel.

I said to her presently, when she had grown more quiet,
"Will you not come over to the fire?" for I wished to make a
test of what she could. She rose obedient, but when she
have made a step she stopped, and stood as one stricken.

"Why not go on?" I asked. She shook her head, and coming
back, sat down in her place. Then, looking at me with open
eyes, as of one waked from sleep, she said simply, "I cannot!"
and remained silent. I rejoiced, for I knew that what she
could not, none of those that we dreaded could. Though there
might be danger to her body, yet her soul was safe!

Presently the horses began to scream, and tore at their
tethers till I came to them and quieted them. When they did
feel my hands on them, they whinnied low as in joy, and licked
at my hands and were quiet for a time. Many times through the
night did I come to them, till it arrive to the cold hour
when all nature is at lowest, and every time my coming was
with quiet of them. In the cold hour the fire began to die,
and I was about stepping forth to replenish it, for now the
snow came in flying sweeps and with it a chill mist. Even in
the dark there was a light of some kind, as there ever is
over snow, and it seemed as though the snow flurries and the
wreaths of mist took shape as of women with trailing gar-
ments. All was in dead, grim silence only that the horses
whinnied and cowered, as if in terror of the worst. I began
to fear, horrible fears. But then came to me the sense of
safety in that ring wherein I stood. I began too, to think
that my imaginings were of the night, and the gloom, and
the unrest that I have gone through, and all the terrible
anxiety. It was as though my memories of all Jonathan's
horrid experience were befooling me. For the snow flakes
and the mist began to wheel and circle round, till I could
get as though a shadowy glimpse of those women that would
have kissed him. And then the horses cowered lower and lower,
and moaned in terror as men do in pain. Even the madness of
fright was not to them, so that they could break away. I
feared for my dear Madam Mina when these weird figures drew
near and circled round. I looked at her, but she sat calm,
and smiled at me. When I would have stepped to the fire to
replenish it, she caught me and held me back, and whispered,
like a voice that one hears in a dream, so low it was.

"No! No! Do not go without. Here you are safe!"

I turned to her, and looking in her eyes said, "But
you? It is for you that I fear!"

Whereat she laughed, a laugh low and unreal, and said,
"Fear for me! Why fear for me? None safer in all the world
from them than I am," and as I wondered at the meaning of her
words, a puff of wind made the flame leap up, and I see the
red scar on her forehead. Then, alas! I knew. Did I not, I
would soon have learned, for the wheeling figures of mist
and snow came closer, but keeping ever without the Holy
circle. Then they began to materialize till, if God have not
taken away my reason, for I saw it through my eyes. There
were before me in actual flesh the same three women that Jon-
athan saw in the room, when they would have kissed his throat.
I knew the swaying round forms, the bright hard eyes, the
white teeth, the ruddy color, the voluptuous lips. They
smiled ever at poor dear Madam Mina. And as their laugh came
through the silence of the night, they twined their arms and
pointed to her, and said in those so sweet tingling tones
that Jonathan said were of the intolerable sweetness of the
water glasses, "Come, sister. Come to us. Come!"

In fear I turned to my poor Madam Mina, and my heart
with gladness leapt like flame. For oh! the terror in her
sweet eyes, the repulsion, the horror, told a story to my
heart that was all of hope. God be thanked she was not, yet
of them. I seized some of the firewood which was by me, and
holding out some of the Wafer, advanced on them towards the
fire. They drew back before me, and laughed their low horrid
laugh. I fed the fire, and feared them not. For I knew that
we were safe within the ring, which she could not leave no
more than they could enter. The horses had ceased to moan,
and lay still on the ground. The snow fell on them softly,
and they grew whiter. I knew that there was for the poor
beasts no more of terror.

And so we remained till the red of the dawn began to
fall through the snow gloom. I was desolate and afraid, and
full of woe and terror. But when that beautiful sun began
to climb the horizon life was to me again. At the first
coming of the dawn the horrid figures melted in the whirling
mist and snow. The wreaths of transparent gloom moved away
towards the castle, and were lost.

Instinctively, with the dawn coming, I turned to Madam
Mina, intending to hypnotize her. But she lay in a deep and
sudden sleep, from which I could not wake her. I tried to
hypnotize through her sleep, but she made no response, none
at all, and the day broke. I fear yet to stir. I have made
my fire and have seen the horses, they are all dead. Today
I have much to do here, and I keep waiting till the sun is up
high. For there may be places where I must go, where that
sunlight, though snow and mist obscure it, will be to me a
safety.

I will strengthen me with breakfast, and then I will do
my terrible work. Madam Mina still sleeps, and God be thanked!
She is calm in her sleep. . .





JONATHAN HARKER'S JOURNAL


4 November, evening.--The accident to the launch has
been a terrible thing for us. Only for it we should have
overtaken the boat long ago, and by now my dear Mina would
have been free. I fear to think of her, off on the wolds
near that horrid place. We have got horses, and we follow
on the track. I note this whilst Godalming is getting ready.
We have our arms. The Szgany must look out if they mean to
fight. Oh, if only Morris and Seward were with us. We must
only hope! If I write no more Goodby Mina! God bless and
keep you.

DR. SEWARD'S DIARY


5 November.--With the dawn we saw the body of Szgany
before us dashing away from the river with their leiter
wagon. They surrounded it in a cluster, and hurried along
as though beset. The snow is falling lightly and there is
a strange excitement in the air. It may be our own feelings,
but the depression is strange. Far off I hear the howling of
wolves. The snow brings them down from the mountains, and
there are dangers to all of us, and from all sides. The horses
are nearly ready, and we are soon off. We ride to death of
some one. God alone knows who, or where, or what, or when,
or how it may be. . .





DR. VAN HELSING'S MEMORANDUM


5 November, afternoon.--I am at least sane. Thank God
for that mercy at all events, though the proving it has been
dreadful. When I left Madam Mina sleeping within the Holy
circle, I took my way to the castle. The blacksmith hammer
which I took in the carriage from Veresti was useful, though
the doors were all open I broke them off the rusty hinges,
lest some ill intent or ill chance should close them, so
that being entered I might not get out. Jonathan's bitter
experience served me here. By memory of his diary I found
my way to the old chapel, for I knew that here my work lay.
The air was oppressive. It seemed as if there was some
sulphurous fume, which at times made me dizzy. Either there
was a roaring in my ears or I heard afar off the howl of
wolves. Then I bethought me of my dear Madam Mina, and I was
in terrible plight. The dilemma had me between his horns.

Her, I had not dare to take into this place, but left
safe from the Vampire in that Holy circle. And yet even
there would be the wolf! I resolve me that my work lay here,
and that as to the wolves we must submit, if it were God's
will. At any rate it was only death and freedom beyond. So
did I choose for her. Had it but been for myself the choice
had been easy, the maw of the wolf were better to rest in
than the grave of the Vampire! So I make my choice to go on
with my work.

I knew that there were at least three graves to find,
graves that are inhabit. So I search, and search, and I
find one of them. She lay in her Vampire sleep, so full of
life and voluptuous beauty that I shudder as though I have
come to do murder. Ah, I doubt not that in the old time,
when such things were, many a man who set forth to do such a
task as mine, found at the last his heart fail him, and then
his nerve. So he delay, and delay, and delay, till the mere
beauty and the fascination of the wanton Undead have hypno-
tize him. And he remain on and on, till sunset come, and the
Vampire sleep be over. Then the beautiful eyes of the fair
woman open and look love, and the voluptuous mouth present to
a kiss, and the man is weak.  And there remain one more victim
in the Vampire fold. One more to swell the grim and grisly
ranks of the Undead!. . .

There is some fascination, surely, when I am moved by
the mere presence of such an one, even lying as she lay in a
tomb fretted with age and heavy with the dust of centuries,
though there be that horrid odor such as the lairs of the
Count have had. Yes, I was moved. I, Van Helsing, with all
my purpose and with my motive for hate. I was moved to a
yearning for delay which seemed to paralyze my faculties and
to clog my very soul. It may have been that the need of nat-
ural sleep, and the strange oppression of the air were be-
ginning to overcome me. Certain it was that I was lapsing
into sleep, the open eyed sleep of one who yields to a sweet
fascination, when there came through the snow stilled air a
long, low wail, so full of woe and pity that it woke me like
the sound of a clarion. For it was the voice of my dear
Madam Mina that I heard.

Then I braced myself again to my horrid task, and
found by wrenching away tomb tops one other of the sisters,
the other dark one. I dared not pause to look on her as I
had on her sister, lest once more I should begin to be en-
thrall. But I go on searching until, presently, I find in a
high great tomb as if made to one much beloved that other
fair sister which, like Jonathan I had seen to gather herself
out of the atoms of the mist. She was so fair to look on, so
radiantly beautiful, so exquisitely voluptuous, that the very
instinct of man in me, which calls some of my sex to love and
to protect one of hers, made my head whirl with new emotion.
But God be thanked, that soul wail of my dear Madam Mina had
not died out of my ears. And, before the spell could be
wrought further upon me, I had nerved myself to my wild work.
By this tim e I had searched all the tombs in the chapel, so
far as I could tell. And as there had been only three of
these Undead phantoms around us in the night, I took it that
there were no more of active Undead existent. There was one
great tomb more lordly than all the rest. Huge it was, and
nobly proportioned. On it was but one word.





DRACULA


This then was the Undead home of the King Vampire, to
whom so many more were due. Its emptiness spoke eloquent to
make certain what I knew. Before I began to restore these
women to their dead selves through my awful work, I laid in
Dracula's tomb some of the Wafer, and so banished him from
it, Undead, for ever.

Then began my terrible task, and I dreaded it. Had it
been but one, it had been easy, comparative. But three! To
begin twice more after I had been through a deed of horror.
For it was terrible with the sweet Miss Lucy, what would it
not be with these strange ones who had survived through cen-
turies, and who had been strenghtened by the passing of the
years. Who would, if they could, have fought for their foul
lives. . .

Oh, my friend John, but it was butcher work. Had I not
been nerved by thoughts of other dead, and of the living over
whom hung such a pall of fear, I could not have gone on. I
tremble and tremble even yet, though till all was over, God
be thanked, my nerve did stand. Had I not seen the repose in
the first place, and the gladness that stole over it just ere
the final dissolution came, as realization that the soul had
been won, I could not have gone further with my butchery. I
could not have endured the horrid screeching as the stake
drove home, the plunging of writhing form, and lips of bloody
foam. I should have fled in terror and left my work undone.
But it is over! And the poor souls, I can pity them now and
weep, as I think of them placid each in her full sleep of
death for a short moment ere fading. For, friend John, hardly
had my knife severed the head of each, before the whole body
began to melt away and crumble into its native dust, as
though the death that should have come centuries agone had
at last assert himself and say at once and loud, "I am here!"

Before I left the castle I so fixed its entrances that
never more can the Count enter there Undead.

When I stepped into the circle where Madam Mina slept,
she woke from her sleep and, seeing me, cried out in pain
that I had endured too much.

"Come!" she said, "come away from this awful place! Let
us go to meet my husband who is, I know, coming towards us."
She was looking thin and pale and weak. But her eyes were
pure and glowed with fervor. I was glad to see her paleness
and her illness, for my mind was full of the fresh horror of
that ruddy vampire sleep.

And so with trust and hope, and yet full of fear, we go
eastward to meet our friends, and him, whom Madam Mina tell
me that she know are coming to meet us.





MINA HARKER'S JOURNAL


6 November.--It was late in the afternoon when the Pro-
fessor and I took our way towards the east whence I knew
Jonathan was coming. We did not go fast, though the way was
steeply downhill, for w e had to take heavy rugs and wraps
with us. We dared not face the possibility of being left
without warmth in the cold and the snow. We had to take some
of our provisions too, for we were in a perfect desolation,
and so far as we could see through the snowfall, there was
not even the sign of habitation. When we had gone about a
mile, I was tired with the heavy walking and sat down to rest.
Then we looked back and saw where the clear line of Drac-
ula's castle cut the sky. For we were so deep under the hill
whereon it was set that the angle of perspective of the Car-
pathian mountains was far below it. We saw it in all its
grandeur, perched a thousand feet on the summit of a sheer
precipice, and with seemingly a great gap between it and the
steep of the adjacent mountain on any side. There was some-
thing wild and uncanny about the place. We could hear the
distant howling of wolves. They were far off, but the sound,
even though coming muffled through the deadening snowfall,
was full of terror. I knew from the way Dr. Van Helsing was
searching about that he was trying to seek some strategic
point, where we would be less exposed in case of attack. The
rough roadway still led downwards. We could trace it through
the drifted snow.

In a little while the Professor signalled to me, so I
got up and joined him. He had found a wonderful spot, a sort
of natural hollow in a rock, with an entrance like a doorway
between two boulders. He took me by the hand and drew me in.

"See!" he said, "here you will be in shelter. And if the
wolves do come I can meet them one by one."

He brought in our furs, and made a snug nest for me, and
got out some provisions and forced them upon me. But I could
not eat, to even try to do so was repulsive to me, and much
as I would have liked to please him, I could not bring myself
to the attempt. He looked very sad, but did not reproach me.
Taking his field glasses from the case, he stood on the top
of the rock, and began to search the horizon.

Suddenly he called out, "Look! Madam Mina, look! Look!"

I sprang up and stood beside him on the rock. He handed
me his glasses and pointed. The snow was now falling more
heavily, and swirled about fiercely, for a high wind was be-
ginning to blow. However, there were times when there were
pauses between the snow flurries and I could see a long way
round. From the height where we were it was possible to see
a great distance. And far off, beyond the white waste of
snow, I could see the river lying like a black ribbon in
kinks and curls as it wound its way. Straight in front of us
and not far off, in fact so near that I wondered we had not
noticed before, came a group of mounted men hurrying along.
In the midst of them was a cart, a long leiter wagon which
swept from side to side, like a dog's tail wagging, with each
stern inequality of the road. Outlined against the snow as
they were, I could see from the men's clothes that they were
peasants or gypsies of some kind.

On the cart was a great square chest. My heart leaped
as I saw it, for I felt that the end was coming. The evening
was now drawing close, and well I knew that at sunset the
Thing, which was till then imprisoned there, would take new
freedom and could in any of many forms elude pursuit. In fear
I turned to the Professor. To my consternation, however, he
was not there. An instant later, I saw him below me. Round
the rock he had drawn a circle, such as we had found shelter
in last night.

When he had completed it he stood beside me again say-
ing, "At least you shall be safe here from him!" He took the
glasses from me, and at the next lull of the snow swept the
whole space below us. "See," he said, "they come quickly. They
are flogging the horses, and galloping as hard as they can."

He paused and went on in a hollow voice, "They are rac-
ing for the sunset. We may be too late. God's will be done!"
Down came another blinding rush of driving snow, and the
whole landscape was blotted out. It soon passed, however,
and once more his glasses were fixed on the plain.

Then came a sudden cry, "Look! Look! Look! See, two
horsemen follow fast, coming up from the south. It must be
Quincey and John. Take the glass. Look before the snow blots
it all out!" I took it and looked. The two men might be Dr.
Seward and Mr. Morris. I knew at all events that neither of
them was Jonathan. At the same time I knew that Jonathan was
not far off. Looking around I saw on the north side of the
coming party two other men, riding at breakneck speed. One
of them I knew was Jonathan, and the other I took, of course,
to be Lord Godalming. They too, were pursuing the party with
the cart. When I told the Professor he shouted in glee like
a schoolboy, and after looking intently till a snow fall
made sight impossible, he laid his Winchester rifle ready for
use against the boulder at the opening of our shelter.

"They are all converging," he said."When the time comes
we shall have gypsies on all sides." I got out my revolver
ready to hand, for whilst we were speaking the howling of
wolves came louder and closer. When the snow storm abated a
moment we looked again. It was strange to see the snow fall-
ing in such heavy flakes close to us, and beyond, the sun
shining more and more brightly as it sank down towards the
far mountain tops. Sweeping the glass all around us I could
see here and there dots moving singly and in twos and threes
and larger numbers. The wolves were gathering for their prey.

Every instant seemed an age whilst we waited. The wind
came now in fierce bursts, and the snow was driven with fury
as it swept upon us in circling eddies. At times we could
not see an arm's length before us. But at others, as the
hollow sounding wind swept by us, it seemed to clear the air
space around us so that we could see afar off. We had of
late been so accustomed to watch for sunrise and sunset, that
we knew with fair accuracy when it would be.  And we knew that
before long the sun would set. It was hard to believe that
by our watches it was less than an hour that we waited in
that rocky shelter before the various bodies began to con-
verge close upon us. The wind came now with fiercer and more
bitter sweeps, and more steadily from the north. It seemingly
had driven the snow clouds from us, for with only occasional
bursts, the snow fell. We could distinguish clearly the
individuals of each party, the pursued and the pursuers.
Strangely enough those pursued did not seem to realize, or
at least to care, that they were pursued. They seemed, how-
ever, to hasten with redoubled speed as the sun dropped lower
and lower on the mountain tops.

Closer and closer they drew. The Professor and I crouc-
hed down behind our rock, and held our weapons ready. I
could see that he was determined that they should not pass.
One and all were quite unaware of our presence.

All at once two voices shouted out to, "Halt!" One was
my Jonathan's, raised in a high key of passion. The other Mr.
Morris' strong resolute tone of quiet command. The gypsies
may not have known the language, but there was no mistaking
the tone, in whatever tongue the words were spoken. Instinc-
tively they reined in, and at the instant Lord Godalming and
Jonathan dashed up at one side and Dr. Seward and Mr. Morris
on the other. The leader of the gypsies, a splendid looking
fellow who sat his horse like a centaur, waved them back, and
in a fierce voice gave to his companions some word to pro-
ceed. They lashed the horses which sprang forward. But the
four men raised their Winchester rifles, and in an unmistak-
able way commanded them to stop. At the same moment Dr. Van
Helsing and I rose behind the rock and pointed our weapons
at them. Seeing that they were surrounded the men tightened
their reins and drew up. The leader turned to them and gave
a word at which every man of the gypsy party drew what wea-
pon he carried, knife or pistol, and held himself in readiness
to attack. Issue was joined in an instant.

The leader, with a quick movement of his rein, threw his
horse out in front, and pointed first to the sun, now close
down on the hill tops, and then to the castle, said something
which I did not understand. For answer, all four men of our
party threw themselves from their horses and dashed towards
the cart. I should have felt terrible fear at seeing Jona-
than in such danger, but that the ardor of battle must have
been upon me as well as the rest of them. I felt no fear,
but only a wild, surging desire to do something. Seeing the
quick movement of our parties, the leader of the gypsies gave
a command. His men instantly formed round the cart in a sort
of undisciplined endeavor, each one shouldering and pushing
the other in his eagerness to carry out the order.

In the midst of this I could see that Jonathan on one
side of the ring of men, and Quincey on the other, were
forcing a way to the cart. It was evident that they were
bent on finishing their task before the sun should set. Noth-
ing seemed to stop or even to hinder them. Neither the level-
led weapons nor the flashing knives of the gypsies in front,
nor the howling of the wolves behind, appeared to even
attract their attention. Jonathan's impetuosity, and the
manifest singleness of his purpose, seemed to overawe those
in front of him. Instinctively they cowered aside and let
him pass. In an instant he had jumped upon the cart, and with
a strength which seemed incredible, raised the great box, and
flung it over the wheel to the ground. In the meantime, Mr.
Morris had had to use force to pass through his side of the
ring of Szgany.  All the time I had been breathlessly watching
Jonathan I had, with the tail of my eye, seen him pressing
desperately forward, and had seen the knives of the gypsies
flash as he won a way through them, and they cut at him. He
had parried with his great bowie knife, and at first I
thought that he too had come through in safety. But as he
sprang beside Jonathan, who had by now jumped from the cart,
I could see that with his left hand he was clutching at his
side, and that the blood was spurting through his fingers. He
did not delay notwithstanding this, for as Jonathan, with
desperate energy, attacked one end of the chest, attempting
to prize off the lid with his great Kukri knife, he attacked
the other frantically with his bowie. Under the efforts of
both men the lid began to yield. The nails drew with a
screeching sound, and the top of the box was thrown back.

By this time the gypsies, seeing themselves covered by
the Winchesters, and at the mercy of Lord Godalming and Dr.
Seward, had given in and made no further resistance. The sun
was almost down on the mountain tops, and the shadows of the
whole group fell upon the snow. I saw the Count lying within
the box upon the earth, some of which the rude falling from
the cart had scattered over him. He was deathly pale, just
like a waxen image, and the red eyes glared with the horrible
vindictive look which I knew so well.

As I looked, the eyes saw the sinking sun, and the look
of hate in them turned to triumph.

But, on the instant, came the sweep and flash of Jona-
than's great knife. I shrieked as I saw it shear through the
throat. Whilst at the same moment Mr. Morris's bowie knife
plunged into the heart.

It was like a miracle, but before our very eyes, and
almost in the drawing of a breath, the whole body crumbled
into dust and passed from our sight.

I shall be glad as long as I live that even in that
moment of final dissolution, there was in the face a look of
peace, such as I never could have imagined might have rested
there.

The Castle of Dracula now stood out against the red sky,
and every stone of its broken battlements was articulated
against the light of the setting sun.

The gypsies, taking us as in some way the cause of the
extraordinary disappearance of the dead man, turned, without
a word, and rode away as if for their lives. Those who were
unmounted jumped upon the leiter wagon and shouted to the
horsemen not to desert them. The wolves, which had withdrawn
to a safe distance, followed in their wake, leaving us alone.

Mr. Morris, who had sunk to the ground, leaned on his
elbow, holding his hand pressed to his side. The blood still
gushed through his fingers. I flew to him, for the Holy circle
did not now keep me back, so did the two doctors. Jonathan
knelt behind him and the wounded man laid back his head on
his shoulder. With a sigh he took, with a feeble effort, my
hand in that of his own which was unstained.

He must have seen the anguish of my heart in my face,
for he smiled at me and said, "I am only too happy to have
been of service! Oh, God!" he cried suddenly, struggling to
a sitting posture and pointing to me. "It was worth for this
to die! Look! Look!"

The sun was now right down upon the mountain top, and
the red gleams fell upon my face, so that it was bathed in
rosy light. With one impulse the men sank on their knees
and a deep and earnest "Amen" broke from all as their eyes
followed the pointing of his finger.

The dying man spoke, "Now God be thanked that all has
not been in vain! See! The snow is not more stainless than
her forehead! The curse has passed away!"

And, to our bitter grief, with a smile and in silence,
he died, a gallant gentleman.





NOTE


Seven years ago we all went through the flames. And
the happiness of some of us since then is, we think, well
worth the pain we endured. It is an added joy to Mina and
to me that our boy's birthday is the same day as that on
which Quincey Morris died. His mother holds, I know, the
secret belief that some of our brave friend's spirit has
passed into him. His bundle of names links all our little
band of men together. But we call him Quincey.

In the summer of this year we made a journey to Transyl-
vania, and went over the old ground which was, and is, to us
so full of vivid and terrible memories. It was almost imposs-
ible to believe that the things which we had seen with our
own eyes and heard with our own ears were living truths.
Every trace of all that had been was blotted out. The castle
stood as before, reared high above a waste of desolation.

When we got home we were talking of the old time, which
we could all look back on without despair, for Godalming and
Seward are both happily married. I took the papers from the
safe where they had been ever since our return so long ago.
We were struck with the fact, that in all the mass of mater-
ial of which the record is composed, there is hardly one
authentic document. Nothing but a mass of typewriting, except
the later notebooks of Mina and Seward and myself, and Van
Helsing's memorandum. We could hardly ask any one, even did
we wish to, to accept these as proofs of so wild a story.
Van Helsing summed it all up as he said, with our boy on his
knee.

"We want no proofs. We ask none to believe us! This boy
will some day know what a brave and gallant woman his mother
is. Already he knows her sweetness and loving care. Later
on he will understand how some men so loved her, that they
did dare much for her sake.

JONATHAN HARKER

Pride and Prejudice
Jane Austen 

Chapter 1
It is a truth universally acknowledged, that a single man in possession of a good fortune, must be in want of a wife. 
However little known the feelings or views of such a man may be on his first entering a neighbourhood, this truth is so well fixed in the minds of the surrounding families, that he is considered the rightful property of some one or other of their daughters. 
"My dear Mr. Bennet," said his lady to him one day, "have you heard that Netherfield Park is let at last?" 
Mr. Bennet replied that he had not. 
"But it is, returned she; "for Mrs. Long has just been here, and she told me all about it. 
Mr. Bennet made no answer. 
"Do you not want to know who has taken it?" cried his wife impatiently. 
"YOU want to tell me, and I have no objection to hearing it." 
This was invitation enough. 
"Why, my dear, you must know, Mrs. Long says that Netherfield is taken by a young man of large fortune from the north of England; that he came down on Monday in a chaise and four to see the place, and was so much delighted with it, that he agreed with Mr. Morris immediately; that he is to take possession before Michaelmas, and some of his servants are to be in the house by the end of next week." 
"What is his name?" 
"Bingley." 
"Is he married or single?" 
"Oh! Single, my dear, to be sure! A single man of large fortune; four or five thousand a year. What a fine thing for our girls!" 
"How so? How can it affect them?" 
"My dear Mr. Bennet," replied his wife, "how can you be so tiresome! You must know that I am thinking of his marrying one of them." 
"Is that his design in settling here?" 
"Design! Nonsense, how can you talk so! But it is very likely that he MAY fall in love with one of them, and therefore you must visit him as soon as he comes." 
"I see no occasion for that. You and the girls may go, or you may send them by themselves, which perhaps will be still better, for as you are as handsome as any of them, Mr. Bingley may like you the best of the party." 
"My dear, you flatter me. I certainly HAVE had my share of beauty, but I do not pretend to be anything extraordinary now. When a woman has five grown-up daughters, she ought to give over thinking of her own beauty." 
"In such cases, a woman has not often much beauty to think of." 
"But, my dear, you must indeed go and see Mr. Bingley when he comes into the neighbourhood." 
"It is more than I engage for, I assure you." 
"But consider your daughters. Only think what an establishment it would be for one of them. Sir William and Lady Lucas are determined to go, merely on that account, for in general, you know, they visit no newcomers. Indeed you must go, for it will be impossible for US to visit him if you do not." 
"You are over-scrupulous, surely. I dare say Mr. Bingley will be very glad to see you; and I will send a few lines by you to assure him of my hearty consent to his marrying whichever he chooses of the girls; though I must throw in a good word for my little Lizzy." 
"I desire you will do no such thing. Lizzy is not a bit better than the others; and I am sure she is not half so handsome as Jane, nor half so good-humoured as Lydia. But you are always giving HER the preference." 
"They have none of them much to recommend them," replied he; "they are all silly and ignorant like other girls; but Lizzy has something more of quickness than her sisters." 
"Mr. Bennet, how CAN you abuse your own children in such a way? You take delight in vexing me. You have no compassion for my poor nerves." 
"You mistake me, my dear. I have a high respect for your nerves. They are my old friends. I have heard you mention them with consideration these last twenty years at least." 
Mr. Bennet was so odd a mixture of quick parts, sarcastic humour, reserve, and caprice, that the experience of three-and-twenty years had been insufficient to make his wife understand his character. HER mind was less difficult to develop. She was a woman of mean understanding, little information, and uncertain temper. When she was discontented, she fancied herself nervous. The business of her life was to get her daughters married; its solace was visiting and news. 
Chapter 2
Mr. Bennet was among the earliest of those who waited on Mr. Bingley. He had always intended to visit him, though to the last always assuring his wife that he should not go; and till the evening after the visit was paid she had no knowledge of it. It was then disclosed in the following manner. Observing his second daughter employed in trimming a hat, he suddenly addressed her with: 
"I hope Mr. Bingley will like it, Lizzy." 
"We are not in a way to know WHAT Mr. Bingley likes," said her mother resentfully, "since we are not to visit." 
"But you forget, mamma," said Elizabeth, "that we shall meet him at the assemblies, and that Mrs. Long promised to introduce him." 
"I do not believe Mrs. Long will do any such thing. She has two nieces of her own. She is a selfish, hypocritical woman, and I have no opinion of her." 
"No more have I," said Mr. Bennet; "and I am glad to find that you do not depend on her serving you." 
Mrs. Bennet deigned not to make any reply, but, unable to contain herself, began scolding one of her daughters. 
"Don't keep coughing so, Kitty, for Heaven's sake! Have a little compassion on my nerves. You tear them to pieces." 
"Kitty has no discretion in her coughs," said her father; "she times them ill." 
"I do not cough for my own amusement," replied Kitty fretfully. "When is your next ball to be, Lizzy?" 
"To-morrow fortnight." 
"Aye, so it is," cried her mother, "and Mrs. Long does not come back till the day before; so it will be impossible for her to introduce him, for she will not know him herself." 
"Then, my dear, you may have the advantage of your friend, and introduce Mr. Bingley to HER." 
"Impossible, Mr. Bennet, impossible, when I am not acquainted with him myself; how can you be so teasing?" 
"I honour your circumspection. A fortnight's acquaintance is certainly very little. One cannot know what a man really is by the end of a fortnight. But if WE do not venture somebody else will; and after all, Mrs. Long and her daughters must stand their chance; and, therefore, as she will think it an act of kindness, if you decline the office, I will take it on myself." 
The girls stared at their father. Mrs. Bennet said only, "Nonsense, nonsense!" 
"What can be the meaning of that emphatic exclamation?" cried he. "Do you consider the forms of introduction, and the stress that is laid on them, as nonsense? I cannot quite agree with you THERE. What say you, Mary? For you are a young lady of deep reflection, I know, and read great books and make extracts." 
Mary wished to say something sensible, but knew not how. 
"While Mary is adjusting her ideas," he continued, "let us return to Mr. Bingley." 
"I am sick of Mr. Bingley," cried his wife. 
"I am sorry to hear THAT; but why did not you tell me that before? If I had known as much this morning I certainly would not have called on him. It is very unlucky; but as I have actually paid the visit, we cannot escape the acquaintance now." 
The astonishment of the ladies was just what he wished; that of Mrs. Bennet perhaps surpassing the rest; though, when the first tumult of joy was over, she began to declare that it was what she had expected all the while. 
"How good it was in you, my dear Mr. Bennet! But I knew I should persuade you at last. I was sure you loved your girls too well to neglect such an acquaintance. Well, how pleased I am! and it is such a good joke, too, that you should have gone this morning and never said a word about it till now." 
"Now, Kitty, you may cough as much as you choose," said Mr. Bennet; and, as he spoke, he left the room, fatigued with the raptures of his wife. 
What an excellent father you have, girls!" said she, when the door was shut. "I do not know how you will ever make him amends for his kindness; or me, either, for that matter. At our time of life it is not so pleasant, I can tell you, to be making new acquaintances every day; but for your sakes, we would do anything. Lydia, my love, though you ARE the youngest, I dare say Mr. Bingley will dance with you at the next ball." 
"Oh!" said Lydia stoutly, "I am not afraid; for though I AM the youngest, I'm the tallest." 
The rest of the evening was spent in conjecturing how soon he would return Mr. Bennet's visit, and determining when they should ask him to dinner. 
Chapter 3
Not all that Mrs. Bennet, however, with the assistance of her five daughters, could ask on the subject, was sufficient to draw from her husband any satisfactory description of Mr. Bingley. They attacked him in various ways\97with barefaced questions, ingenious suppositions, and distant surmises; but he eluded the skill of them all, and they were at last obliged to accept the second-hand intelligence of their neighbour, Lady Lucas. Her report was highly favourable. Sir William had been delighted with him. He was quite young, wonderfully handsome, extremely agreeable, and, to crown the whole, he meant to be at the next assembly with a large party. Nothing could be more delightful! To be fond of dancing was a certain step towards falling in love; and very lively hopes of Mr. Bingley's heart were entertained. 
"If I can but see one of my daughters happily settled at Netherfield," said Mrs. Bennet to her husband, "and all the others equally well married, I shall have nothing to wish for." 
In a few days Mr. Bingley returned Mr. Bennet's visit, and sat about ten minutes with him in his library. He had entertained hopes of being admitted to a sight of the young ladies, of whose beauty he had heard much; but he saw only the father. The ladies were somewhat more fortunate, for they had the advantage of ascertaining from an upper window that he wore a blue coat, and rode a black horse. 
An invitation to dinner was soon afterwards dispatched; and already had Mrs. Bennet planned the courses that were to do credit to her housekeeping, when an answer arrived which deferred it all. Mr. Bingley was obliged to be in town the following day, and, consequently, unable to accept the honour of their invitation, etc. Mrs. Bennet was quite disconcerted. She could not imagine what business he could have in town so soon after his arrival in Hertfordshire; and she began to fear that he might be always flying about from one place to another, and never settled at Netherfield as he ought to be. Lady Lucas quieted her fears a little by starting the idea of his being gone to London only to get a large party for the ball; and a report soon followed that Mr. Bingley was to bring twelve ladies and seven gentlemen with him to the assembly. The girls grieved over such a number of ladies, but were comforted the day before the ball by hearing, that instead of twelve he brought only six with him from London\97his five sisters and a cousin. And when the party entered the assembly room it consisted of only five altogether\97Mr. Bingley, his two sisters, the husband of the eldest, and another young man. 
Mr. Bingley was good-looking and gentlemanlike; he had a pleasant countenance, and easy, unaffected manners. His sisters were fine women, with an air of decided fashion. His brother-in-law, Mr. Hurst, merely looked the gentleman; but his friend Mr. Darcy soon drew the attention of the room by his fine, tall person, handsome features, noble mien, and the report which was in general circulation within five minutes after his entrance, of his having ten thousand a year. The gentlemen pronounced him to be a fine figure of a man, the ladies declared he was much handsomer than Mr. Bingley, and he was looked at with great admiration for about half the evening, till his manners gave a disgust which turned the tide of his popularity; for he was discovered to be proud; to be above his company, and above being pleased; and not all his large estate in Derbyshire could then save him from having a most forbidding, disagreeable countenance, and being unworthy to be compared with his friend. 
Mr. Bingley had soon made himself acquainted with all the principal people in the room; he was lively and unreserved, danced every dance, was angry that the ball closed so early, and talked of giving one himself at Netherfield. Such amiable qualities must speak for themselves. What a contrast between him and his friend! Mr. Darcy danced only once with Mrs. Hurst and once with Miss Bingley, declined being introduced to any other lady, and spent the rest of the evening in walking about the room, speaking occasionally to one of his own party. His character was decided. He was the proudest, most disagreeable man in the world, and everybody hoped that he would never come there again. Amongst the most violent against him was Mrs. Bennet, whose dislike of his general behaviour was sharpened into particular resentment by his having slighted one of her daughters. 
Elizabeth Bennet had been obliged, by the scarcity of gentlemen, to sit down for two dances; and during part of that time, Mr. Darcy had been standing near enough for her to hear a conversation between him and Mr. Bingley, who came from the dance for a few minutes, to press his friend to join it. 
"Come, Darcy," said he, "I must have you dance. I hate to see you standing about by yourself in this stupid manner. You had much better dance." 
"I certainly shall not. You know how I detest it, unless I am particularly acquainted with my partner. At such an assembly as this it would be insupportable. Your sisters are engaged, and there is not another woman in the room whom it would not be a punishment to me to stand up with." 
"I would not be so fastidious as you are," cried Mr. Bingley, "for a kingdom! Upon my honour, I never met with so many pleasant girls in my life as I have this evening; and there are several of them you see uncommonly pretty." 
"YOU are dancing with the only handsome girl in the room," said Mr. Darcy, looking at the eldest Miss Bennet. 
"Oh! She is the most beautiful creature I ever beheld! But there is one of her sisters sitting down just behind you, who is very pretty, and I dare say very agreeable. Do let me ask my partner to introduce you." 
"Which do you mean?" and turning round he looked for a moment at Elizabeth, till catching her eye, he withdrew his own and coldly said: "She is tolerable, but not handsome enough to tempt ME; I am in no humour at present to give consequence to young ladies who are slighted by other men. You had better return to your partner and enjoy her smiles, for you are wasting your time with me." 
Mr. Bingley followed his advice. Mr. Darcy walked off; and Elizabeth remained with no very cordial feelings toward him. She told the story, however, with great spirit among her friends; for she had a lively, playful disposition, which delighted in anything ridiculous. 
The evening altogether passed off pleasantly to the whole family. Mrs. Bennet had seen her eldest daughter much admired by the Netherfield party. Mr. Bingley had danced with her twice, and she had been distinguished by his sisters. Jane was as much gratified by this as her mother could be, though in a quieter way. Elizabeth felt Jane's pleasure. Mary had heard herself mentioned to Miss Bingley as the most accomplished girl in the neighbourhood; and Catherine and Lydia had been fortunate enough never to be without partners, which was all that they had yet learnt to care for at a ball. They returned, therefore, in good spirits to Longbourn, the village where they lived, and of which they were the principal inhabitants. They found Mr. Bennet still up. With a book he was regardless of time; and on the present occasion he had a good deal of curiosity as to the events of an evening which had raised such splendid expectations. He had rather hoped that his wife's views on the stranger would be disappointed; but he soon found out that he had a different story to hear. 
"Oh! my dear Mr. Bennet," as she entered the room, "we have had a most delightful evening, a most excellent ball. I wish you had been there. Jane was so admired, nothing could be like it. Everybody said how well she looked; and Mr. Bingley thought her quite beautiful, and danced with her twice! Only think of THAT, my dear; he actually danced with her twice! and she was the only creature in the room that he asked a second time. First of all, he asked Miss Lucas. I was so vexed to see him stand up with her! But, however, he did not admire her at all; indeed, nobody can, you know; and he seemed quite struck with Jane as she was going down the dance. So he inquired who she was, and got introduced, and asked her for the two next. Then the two third he danced with Miss King, and the two fourth with Maria Lucas, and the two fifth with Jane again, and the two sixth with Lizzy, and the BOULANGER\97" 
"If he had had any compassion for ME," cried her husband impatiently, "he would not have danced half so much! For God's sake, say no more of his partners. O that he had sprained his ankle in the first place!" 
"Oh! my dear, I am quite delighted with him. He is so excessively handsome! And his sisters are charming women. I never in my life saw anything more elegant than their dresses. I dare say the lace upon Mrs. Hurst's gown\97" 
Here she was interrupted again. Mr. Bennet protested against any description of finery. She was therefore obliged to seek another branch of the subject, and related, with much bitterness of spirit and some exaggeration, the shocking rudeness of Mr. Darcy. 
"But I can assure you," she added, "that Lizzy does not lose much by not suiting HIS fancy; for he is a most disagreeable, horrid man, not at all worth pleasing. So high and so conceited that there was no enduring him! He walked here, and he walked there, fancying himself so very great! Not handsome enough to dance with! I wish you had been there, my dear, to have given him one of your set-downs. I quite detest the man." 
Chapter 4
When Jane and Elizabeth were alone, the former, who had been cautious in her praise of Mr. Bingley before, expressed to her sister just how very much she admired him. 
"He is just what a young man ought to be," said she, "sensible, good-humoured, lively; and I never saw such happy manners!\97so much ease, with such perfect good breeding!" 
"He is also handsome," replied Elizabeth, "which a young man ought likewise to be, if he possibly can. His character is thereby complete." 
"I was very much flattered by his asking me to dance a second time. I did not expect such a compliment." 
"Did not you? I did for you. But that is one great difference between us. Compliments always take YOU by surprise, and ME never. What could be more natural than his asking you again? He could not help seeing that you were about five times as pretty as every other woman in the room. No thanks to his gallantry for that. Well, he certainly is very agreeable, and I give you leave to like him. You have liked many a stupider person." 
"Dear Lizzy!" 
"Oh! you are a great deal too apt, you know, to like people in general. You never see a fault in anybody. All the world are good and agreeable in your eyes. I never heard you speak ill of a human being in your life." 
"I would not wish to be hasty in censuring anyone; but I always speak what I think." 
"I know you do; and it is THAT which makes the wonder. With YOUR good sense, to be so honestly blind to the follies and nonsense of others! Affectation of candour is common enough\97one meets with it everywhere. But to be candid without ostentation or design\97to take the good of everybody's character and make it still better, and say nothing of the bad\97belongs to you alone. And so you like this man's sisters, too, do you? Their manners are not equal to his." 
"Certainly not\97at first. But they are very pleasing women when you converse with them. Miss Bingley is to live with her brother, and keep his house; and I am much mistaken if we shall not find a very charming neighbour in her." 
Elizabeth listened in silence, but was not convinced; their behaviour at the assembly had not been calculated to please in general; and with more quickness of observation and less pliancy of temper than her sister, and with a judgement too unassailed by any attention to herself, she was very little disposed to approve them. They were in fact very fine ladies; not deficient in good humour when they were pleased, nor in the power of making themselves agreeable when they chose it, but proud and conceited. They were rather handsome, had been educated in one of the first private seminaries in town, had a fortune of twenty thousand pounds, were in the habit of spending more than they ought, and of associating with people of rank, and were therefore in every respect entitled to think well of themselves, and meanly of others. They were of a respectable family in the north of England; a circumstance more deeply impressed on their memories than that their brother's fortune and their own had been acquired by trade. 
Mr. Bingley inherited property to the amount of nearly a hundred thousand pounds from his father, who had intended to purchase an estate, but did not live to do it. Mr. Bingley intended it likewise, and sometimes made choice of his county; but as he was now provided with a good house and the liberty of a manor, it was doubtful to many of those who best knew the easiness of his temper, whether he might not spend the remainder of his days at Netherfield, and leave the next generation to purchase. 
His sisters were anxious for his having an estate of his own; but, though he was now only established as a tenant, Miss Bingley was by no means unwilling to preside at his table\97nor was Mrs. Hurst, who had married a man of more fashion than fortune, less disposed to consider his house as her home when it suited her. Mr. Bingley had not been of age two years, when he was tempted by an accidental recommendation to look at Netherfield House. He did look at it, and into it for half-an-hour\97was pleased with the situation and the principal rooms, satisfied with what the owner said in its praise, and took it immediately. 
Between him and Darcy there was a very steady friendship, in spite of great opposition of character. Bingley was endeared to Darcy by the easiness, openness, and ductility of his temper, though no disposition could offer a greater contrast to his own, and though with his own he never appeared dissatisfied. On the strength of Darcy's regard, Bingley had the firmest reliance, and of his judgement the highest opinion. In understanding, Darcy was the superior. Bingley was by no means deficient, but Darcy was clever. He was at the same time haughty, reserved, and fastidious, and his manners, though well-bred, were not inviting. In that respect his friend had greatly the advantage. Bingley was sure of being liked wherever he appeared, Darcy was continually giving offense. 
The manner in which they spoke of the Meryton assembly was sufficiently characteristic. Bingley had never met with more pleasant people or prettier girls in his life; everybody had been most kind and attentive to him; there had been no formality, no stiffness; he had soon felt acquainted with all the room; and, as to Miss Bennet, he could not conceive an angel more beautiful. Darcy, on the contrary, had seen a collection of people in whom there was little beauty and no fashion, for none of whom he had felt the smallest interest, and from none received either attention or pleasure. Miss Bennet he acknowledged to be pretty, but she smiled too much. 
Mrs. Hurst and her sister allowed it to be so\97but still they admired her and liked her, and pronounced her to be a sweet girl, and one whom they would not object to know more of. Miss Bennet was therefore established as a sweet girl, and their brother felt authorized by such commendation to think of her as he chose. 
Chapter 5
Within a short walk of Longbourn lived a family with whom the Bennets were particularly intimate. Sir William Lucas had been formerly in trade in Meryton, where he had made a tolerable fortune, and risen to the honour of knighthood by an address to the king during his mayoralty. The distinction had perhaps been felt too strongly. It had given him a disgust to his business, and to his residence in a small market town; and, in quitting them both, he had removed with his family to a house about a mile from Meryton, denominated from that period Lucas Lodge, where he could think with pleasure of his own importance, and, unshackled by business, occupy himself solely in being civil to all the world. For, though elated by his rank, it did not render him supercilious; on the contrary, he was all attention to everybody. By nature inoffensive, friendly, and obliging, his presentation at St. James's had made him courteous. 
Lady Lucas was a very good kind of woman, not too clever to be a valuable neighbour to Mrs. Bennet. They had several children. The eldest of them, a sensible, intelligent young woman, about twenty-seven, was Elizabeth's intimate friend. 
That the Miss Lucases and the Miss Bennets should meet to talk over a ball was absolutely necessary; and the morning after the assembly brought the former to Longbourn to hear and to communicate. 
"YOU began the evening well, Charlotte," said Mrs. Bennet with civil self-command to Miss Lucas. "YOU were Mr. Bingley's first choice." 
"Yes; but he seemed to like his second better." 
"Oh! you mean Jane, I suppose, because he danced with her twice. To be sure that DID seem as if he admired her\97indeed I rather believe he DID\97I heard something about it\97but I hardly know what\97something about Mr. Robinson." 
"Perhaps you mean what I overheard between him and Mr. Robinson; did not I mention it to you? Mr. Robinson's asking him how he liked our Meryton assemblies, and whether he did not think there were a great many pretty women in the room, and WHICH he thought the prettiest? and his answering immediately to the last question: 'Oh! the eldest Miss Bennet, beyond a doubt; there cannot be two opinions on that point.'" 
"Upon my word! Well, that is very decided indeed\97that does seem as if\97but, however, it may all come to nothing, you know." 
"MY overhearings were more to the purpose than YOURS, Eliza," said Charlotte. "Mr. Darcy is not so well worth listening to as his friend, is he?\97poor Eliza!\97to be only just TOLERABLE." 
"I beg you would not put it into Lizzy's head to be vexed by his ill-treatment, for he is such a disagreeable man, that it would be quite a misfortune to be liked by him. Mrs. Long told me last night that he sat close to her for half-an-hour without once opening his lips." 
"Are you quite sure, ma'am?\97is not there a little mistake?" said Jane. "I certainly saw Mr. Darcy speaking to her." 
"Aye\97because she asked him at last how he liked Netherfield, and he could not help answering her; but she said he seemed quite angry at being spoke to." 
"Miss Bingley told me," said Jane, "that he never speaks much, unless among his intimate acquaintances. With THEM he is remarkably agreeable." 
"I do not believe a word of it, my dear. If he had been so very agreeable, he would have talked to Mrs. Long. But I can guess how it was; everybody says that he is eat up with pride, and I dare say he had heard somehow that Mrs. Long does not keep a carriage, and had come to the ball in a hack chaise." 
"I do not mind his not talking to Mrs. Long," said Miss Lucas, "but I wish he had danced with Eliza." 
"Another time, Lizzy," said her mother, "I would not dance with HIM, if I were you." 
"I believe, ma'am, I may safely promise you NEVER to dance with him." 
"His pride," said Miss Lucas, "does not offend ME so much as pride often does, because there is an excuse for it. One cannot wonder that so very fine a young man, with family, fortune, everything in his favour, should think highly of himself. If I may so express it, he has a RIGHT to be proud." 
"That is very true," replied Elizabeth, "and I could easily forgive HIS pride, if he had not mortified MINE." 
"Pride," observed Mary, who piqued herself upon the solidity of her reflections, "is a very common failing, I believe. By all that I have ever read, I am convinced that it is very common indeed; that human nature is particularly prone to it, and that there are very few of us who do not cherish a feeling of self-complacency on the score of some quality or other, real or imaginary. Vanity and pride are different things, though the words are often used synonymously. A person may be proud without being vain. Pride relates more to our opinion of ourselves, vanity to what we would have others think of us." 
"If I were as rich as Mr. Darcy," cried a young Lucas, who came with his sisters, "I should not care how proud I was. I would keep a pack of foxhounds, and drink a bottle of wine a day." 
"Then you would drink a great deal more than you ought," said Mrs. Bennet; "and if I were to see you at it, I should take away your bottle directly." 
The boy protested that she should not; she continued to declare that she would, and the argument ended only with the visit. 
Chapter 6
The ladies of Longbourn soon waited on those of Netherfield. The visit was soon returned in due form. Miss Bennet's pleasing manners grew on the goodwill of Mrs. Hurst and Miss Bingley; and though the mother was found to be intolerable, and the younger sisters not worth speaking to, a wish of being better acquainted with THEM was expressed towards the two eldest. By Jane, this attention was received with the greatest pleasure, but Elizabeth still saw superciliousness in their treatment of everybody, hardly excepting even her sister, and could not like them; though their kindness to Jane, such as it was, had a value as arising in all probability from the influence of their brother's admiration. It was generally evident whenever they met, that he DID admire her and to HER it was equally evident that Jane was yielding to the preference which she had begun to entertain for him from the first, and was in a way to be very much in love; but she considered with pleasure that it was not likely to be discovered by the world in general, since Jane united, with great strength of feeling, a composure of temper and a uniform cheerfulness of manner which would guard her from the suspicions of the impertinent. She mentioned this to her friend Miss Lucas. 
"It may perhaps be pleasant," replied Charlotte, "to be able to impose on the public in such a case; but it is sometimes a disadvantage to be so very guarded. If a woman conceals her affection with the same skill from the object of it, she may lose the opportunity of fixing him; and it will then be but poor consolation to believe the world equally in the dark. There is so much of gratitude or vanity in almost every attachment, that it is not safe to leave any to itself. We can all BEGIN freely\97a slight preference is natural enough; but there are very few of us who have heart enough to be really in love without encouragement. In nine cases out of ten a women had better show MORE affection than she feels. Bingley likes your sister undoubtedly; but he may never do more than like her, if she does not help him on." 
"But she does help him on, as much as her nature will allow. If I can perceive her regard for him, he must be a simpleton, indeed, not to discover it too." 
"Remember, Eliza, that he does not know Jane's disposition as you do." 
"But if a woman is partial to a man, and does not endeavour to conceal it, he must find it out." 
"Perhaps he must, if he sees enough of her. But, though Bingley and Jane meet tolerably often, it is never for many hours together; and, as they always see each other in large mixed parties, it is impossible that every moment should be employed in conversing together. Jane should therefore make the most of every half-hour in which she can command his attention. When she is secure of him, there will be more leisure for falling in love as much as she chooses." 
"Your plan is a good one," replied Elizabeth, "where nothing is in question but the desire of being well married, and if I were determined to get a rich husband, or any husband, I dare say I should adopt it. But these are not Jane's feelings; she is not acting by design. As yet, she cannot even be certain of the degree of her own regard nor of its reasonableness. She has known him only a fortnight. She danced four dances with him at Meryton; she saw him one morning at his own house, and has since dined with him in company four times. This is not quite enough to make her understand his character." 
"Not as you represent it. Had she merely DINED with him, she might only have discovered whether he had a good appetite; but you must remember that four evenings have also been spent together\97and four evenings may do a great deal." 
"Yes; these four evenings have enabled them to ascertain that they both like Vingt-un better than Commerce; but with respect to any other leading characteristic, I do not imagine that much has been unfolded." 
"Well," said Charlotte, "I wish Jane success with all my heart; and if she were married to him to-morrow, I should think she had as good a chance of happiness as if she were to be studying his character for a twelvemonth. Happiness in marriage is entirely a matter of chance. If the dispositions of the parties are ever so well known to each other or ever so similar beforehand, it does not advance their felicity in the least. They always continue to grow sufficiently unlike afterwards to have their share of vexation; and it is better to know as little as possible of the defects of the person with whom you are to pass your life." 
"You make me laugh, Charlotte; but it is not sound. You know it is not sound, and that you would never act in this way yourself." 
Occupied in observing Mr. Bingley's attentions to her sister, Elizabeth was far from suspecting that she was herself becoming an object of some interest in the eyes of his friend. Mr. Darcy had at first scarcely allowed her to be pretty; he had looked at her without admiration at the ball; and when they next met, he looked at her only to criticise. But no sooner had he made it clear to himself and his friends that she hardly had a good feature in her face, than he began to find it was rendered uncommonly intelligent by the beautiful expression of her dark eyes. To this discovery succeeded some others equally mortifying. Though he had detected with a critical eye more than one failure of perfect symmetry in her form, he was forced to acknowledge her figure to be light and pleasing; and in spite of his asserting that her manners were not those of the fashionable world, he was caught by their easy playfulness. Of this she was perfectly unaware; to her he was only the man who made himself agreeable nowhere, and who had not thought her handsome enough to dance with. 
He began to wish to know more of her, and as a step towards conversing with her himself, attended to her conversation with others. His doing so drew her notice. It was at Sir William Lucas's, where a large party were assembled. 
"What does Mr. Darcy mean," said she to Charlotte, "by listening to my conversation with Colonel Forster?" 
"That is a question which Mr. Darcy only can answer." 
"But if he does it any more I shall certainly let him know that I see what he is about. He has a very satirical eye, and if I do not begin by being impertinent myself, I shall soon grow afraid of him." 
On his approaching them soon afterwards, though without seeming to have any intention of speaking, Miss Lucas defied her friend to mention such a subject to him; which immediately provoking Elizabeth to do it, she turned to him and said: 
"Did you not think, Mr. Darcy, that I expressed myself uncommonly well just now, when I was teasing Colonel Forster to give us a ball at Meryton?" 
"With great energy; but it is always a subject which makes a lady energetic." 
"You are severe on us." 
"It will be HER turn soon to be teased," said Miss Lucas. "I am going to open the instrument, Eliza, and you know what follows." 
"You are a very strange creature by way of a friend!\97always wanting me to play and sing before anybody and everybody! If my vanity had taken a musical turn, you would have been invaluable; but as it is, I would really rather not sit down before those who must be in the habit of hearing the very best performers." On Miss Lucas's persevering, however, she added, "Very well, if it must be so, it must." And gravely glancing at Mr. Darcy, "There is a fine old saying, which everybody here is of course familiar with: 'Keep your breath to cool your porridge'; and I shall keep mine to swell my song." 
Her performance was pleasing, though by no means capital. After a song or two, and before she could reply to the entreaties of several that she would sing again, she was eagerly succeeded at the instrument by her sister Mary, who having, in consequence of being the only plain one in the family, worked hard for knowledge and accomplishments, was always impatient for display. 
Mary had neither genius nor taste; and though vanity had given her application, it had given her likewise a pedantic air and conceited manner, which would have injured a higher degree of excellence than she had reached. Elizabeth, easy and unaffected, had been listened to with much more pleasure, though not playing half so well; and Mary, at the end of a long concerto, was glad to purchase praise and gratitude by Scotch and Irish airs, at the request of her younger sisters, who, with some of the Lucases, and two or three officers, joined eagerly in dancing at one end of the room. 
Mr. Darcy stood near them in silent indignation at such a mode of passing the evening, to the exclusion of all conversation, and was too much engrossed by his thoughts to perceive that Sir William Lucas was his neighbour, till Sir William thus began: 
"What a charming amusement for young people this is, Mr. Darcy! There is nothing like dancing after all. I consider it as one of the first refinements of polished society." 
"Certainly, sir; and it has the advantage also of being in vogue amongst the less polished societies of the world. Every savage can dance." 
Sir William only smiled. "Your friend performs delightfully," he continued after a pause, on seeing Bingley join the group; "and I doubt not that you are an adept in the science yourself, Mr. Darcy." 
"You saw me dance at Meryton, I believe, sir." 
"Yes, indeed, and received no inconsiderable pleasure from the sight. Do you often dance at St. James's?" 
"Never, sir." 
"Do you not think it would be a proper compliment to the place?" 
"It is a compliment which I never pay to any place if I can avoid it." 
"You have a house in town, I conclude?" 
Mr. Darcy bowed. 
"I had once had some thought of fixing in town myself\97for I am fond of superior society; but I did not feel quite certain that the air of London would agree with Lady Lucas." 
He paused in hopes of an answer; but his companion was not disposed to make any; and Elizabeth at that instant moving towards them, he was struck with the action of doing a very gallant thing, and called out to her: 
"My dear Miss Eliza, why are you not dancing? Mr. Darcy, you must allow me to present this young lady to you as a very desirable partner. You cannot refuse to dance, I am sure when so much beauty is before you." And, taking her hand, he would have given it to Mr. Darcy who, though extremely surprised, was not unwilling to receive it, when she instantly drew back, and said with some discomposure to Sir William: 
"Indeed, sir, I have not the least intention of dancing. I entreat you not to suppose that I moved this way in order to beg for a partner." 
Mr. Darcy, with grave propriety, requested to be allowed the honour of her hand, but in vain. Elizabeth was determined; nor did Sir William at all shake her purpose by his attempt at persuasion. 
"You excel so much in the dance, Miss Eliza, that it is cruel to deny me the happiness of seeing you; and though this gentleman dislikes the amusement in general, he can have no objection, I am sure, to oblige us for one half-hour." 
"Mr. Darcy is all politeness," said Elizabeth, smiling. 
"He is, indeed; but, considering the inducement, my dear Miss Eliza, we cannot wonder at his complaisance\97for who would object to such a partner?" 
Elizabeth looked archly, and turned away. Her resistance had not injured her with the gentleman, and he was thinking of her with some complacency, when thus accosted by Miss Bingley: 
"I can guess the subject of your reverie." 
"I should imagine not." 
"You are considering how insupportable it would be to pass many evenings in this manner\97in such society; and indeed I am quite of you opinion. I was never more annoyed! The insipidity, and yet the noise\97the nothingness, and yet the self-importance of all those people! What would I give to hear your strictures on them!" 
"You conjecture is totally wrong, I assure you. My mind was more agreeably engaged. I have been meditating on the very great pleasure which a pair of fine eyes in the face of a pretty woman can bestow." 
Miss Bingley immediately fixed her eyes on his face, and desired he would tell her what lady had the credit of inspiring such reflections. Mr. Darcy replied with great intrepidity: 
"Miss Elizabeth Bennet." 
"Miss Elizabeth Bennet!" repeated Miss Bingley. "I am all astonishment. How long has she been such a favourite?\97and pray, when am I to wish you joy?" 
"That is exactly the question which I expected you to ask. A lady's imagination is very rapid; it jumps from admiration to love, from love to matrimony, in a moment. I knew you would be wishing me joy." 
"Nay, if you are serious about it, I shall consider the matter is absolutely settled. You will be having a charming mother-in-law, indeed; and, of course, she will always be at Pemberley with you." 
He listened to her with perfect indifference while she chose to entertain herself in this manner; and as his composure convinced her that all was safe, her wit flowed long. 
Chapter 7
Mr. Bennet's property consisted almost entirely in an estate of two thousand a year, which, unfortunately for his daughters, was entailed, in default of heirs male, on a distant relation; and their mother's fortune, though ample for her situation in life, could but ill supply the deficiency of his. Her father had been an attorney in Meryton, and had left her four thousand pounds. 
She had a sister married to a Mr. Phillips, who had been a clerk to their father and succeeded him in the business, and a brother settled in London in a respectable line of trade. 
The village of Longbourn was only one mile from Meryton; a most convenient distance for the young ladies, who were usually tempted thither three or four times a week, to pay their duty to their aunt and to a milliner's shop just over the way. The two youngest of the family, Catherine and Lydia, were particularly frequent in these attentions; their minds were more vacant than their sisters', and when nothing better offered, a walk to Meryton was necessary to amuse their morning hours and furnish conversation for the evening; and however bare of news the country in general might be, they always contrived to learn some from their aunt. At present, indeed, they were well supplied both with news and happiness by the recent arrival of a militia regiment in the neighbourhood; it was to remain the whole winter, and Meryton was the headquarters. 
Their visits to Mrs. Phillips were now productive of the most interesting intelligence. Every day added something to their knowledge of the officers' names and connections. Their lodgings were not long a secret, and at length they began to know the officers themselves. Mr. Phillips visited them all, and this opened to his nieces a store of felicity unknown before. They could talk of nothing but officers; and Mr. Bingley's large fortune, the mention of which gave animation to their mother, was worthless in their eyes when opposed to the regimentals of an ensign. 
After listening one morning to their effusions on this subject, Mr. Bennet coolly observed: 
"From all that I can collect by your manner of talking, you must be two of the silliest girls in the country. I have suspected it some time, but I am now convinced." 
Catherine was disconcerted, and made no answer; but Lydia, with perfect indifference, continued to express her admiration of Captain Carter, and her hope of seeing him in the course of the day, as he was going the next morning to London. 
"I am astonished, my dear," said Mrs. Bennet, "that you should be so ready to think your own children silly. If I wished to think slightingly of anybody's children, it should not be of my own, however." 
"If my children are silly, I must hope to be always sensible of it." 
"Yes\97but as it happens, they are all of them very clever." 
"This is the only point, I flatter myself, on which we do not agree. I had hoped that our sentiments coincided in every particular, but I must so far differ from you as to think our two youngest daughters uncommonly foolish." 
"My dear Mr. Bennet, you must not expect such girls to have the sense of their father and mother. When they get to our age, I dare say they will not think about officers any more than we do. I remember the time when I liked a red coat myself very well\97and, indeed, so I do still at my heart; and if a smart young colonel, with five or six thousand a year, should want one of my girls I shall not say nay to him; and I thought Colonel Forster looked very becoming the other night at Sir William's in his regimentals." 
"Mamma," cried Lydia, "my aunt says that Colonel Forster and Captain Carter do not go so often to Miss Watson's as they did when they first came; she sees them now very often standing in Clarke's library." 
Mrs. Bennet was prevented replying by the entrance of the footman with a note for Miss Bennet; it came from Netherfield, and the servant waited for an answer. Mrs. Bennet's eyes sparkled with pleasure, and she was eagerly calling out, while her daughter read, 
"Well, Jane, who is it from? What is it about? What does he say? Well, Jane, make haste and tell us; make haste, my love." 
"It is from Miss Bingley," said Jane, and then read it aloud. 
"MY DEAR FRIEND,\97 
"If you are not so compassionate as to dine to-day with Louisa and me, we shall be in danger of hating each other for the rest of our lives, for a whole day's tete-a-tete between two women can never end without a quarrel. Come as soon as you can on receipt of this. My brother and the gentlemen are to dine with the officers.\97Yours ever, 
"CAROLINE BINGLEY" 
"With the officers!" cried Lydia. "I wonder my aunt did not tell us of THAT." 
"Dining out," said Mrs. Bennet, "that is very unlucky." 
"Can I have the carriage?" said Jane. 
"No, my dear, you had better go on horseback, because it seems likely to rain; and then you must stay all night." 
"That would be a good scheme," said Elizabeth, "if you were sure that they would not offer to send her home." 
"Oh! but the gentlemen will have Mr. Bingley's chaise to go to Meryton, and the Hursts have no horses to theirs." 
"I had much rather go in the coach." 
"But, my dear, your father cannot spare the horses, I am sure. They are wanted in the farm, Mr. Bennet, are they not?" 
"They are wanted in the farm much oftener than I can get them." 
"But if you have got them to-day," said Elizabeth, "my mother's purpose will be answered." 
She did at last extort from her father an acknowledgment that the horses were engaged. Jane was therefore obliged to go on horseback, and her mother attended her to the door with many cheerful prognostics of a bad day. Her hopes were answered; Jane had not been gone long before it rained hard. Her sisters were uneasy for her, but her mother was delighted. The rain continued the whole evening without intermission; Jane certainly could not some back. 
"This was a lucky idea of mine, indeed!" said Mrs. Bennet more than once, as if the credit of making it rain were all her own. Till the next morning, however, she was not aware of all the felicity of her contrivance. Breakfast was scarcely over when a servant from Netherfield brought the following note for Elizabeth: 
"MY DEAREST LIZZY,\97 
"I find myself very unwell this morning, which, I suppose, is to be imputed to my getting wet through yesterday. My kind friends will not hear of my returning till I am better. They insist also on my seeing Mr. Jones\97therefore do not be alarmed if you should hear of his having been to me\97and, excepting a sore throat and headache, there is not much the matter with me.\97Yours, etc." 
"Well, my dear," said Mr. Bennet, when Elizabeth had read the note aloud, "if your daughter should have a dangerous fit of illness\97if she should die, it would be a comfort to know that it was all in pursuit of Mr. Bingley, and under your orders." 
"Oh! I am not afraid of her dying. People do not die of little trifling colds. She will be taken good care of. As long as she stays there, it is all very well. I would go an see her if I could have the carriage." 
Elizabeth, feeling really anxious, was determined to go to her, though the carriage was not to be had; and as she was no horsewoman, walking was her only alternative. She declared her resolution. 
"How can you be so silly," cried her mother, "as to think of such a thing, in all this dirt! You will not be fit to be seen when you get there." 
"I shall be very fit to see Jane\97which is all I want." 
"Is this a hint to me, Lizzy," said her father, "to send for the horses?" 
"No, indeed, I do not wish to avoid the walk. The distance is nothing when one has a motive; only three miles. I shall be back by dinner." 
"I admire the activity of your benevolence," observed Mary, "but every impulse of feeling should be guided by reason; and, in my opinion, exertion should always be in proportion to what is required." 
"We will go as far as Meryton with you," said Catherine and Lydia. Elizabeth accepted their company, and the three young ladies set off together. 
"If we make haste," said Lydia, as they walked along, "perhaps we may see something of Captain Carter before he goes." 
In Meryton they parted; the two youngest repaired to the lodgings of one of the officers' wives, and Elizabeth continued her walk alone, crossing field after field at a quick pace, jumping over stiles and springing over puddles with impatient activity, and finding herself at last within view of the house, with weary ankles, dirty stockings, and a face glowing with the warmth of exercise. 
She was shown into the breakfast-parlour, where all but Jane were assembled, and where her appearance created a great deal of surprise. That she should have walked three miles so early in the day, in such dirty weather, and by herself, was almost incredible to Mrs. Hurst and Miss Bingley; and Elizabeth was convinced that they held her in contempt for it. She was received, however, very politely by them; and in their brother's manners there was something better than politeness; there was good humour and kindness. Mr. Darcy said very little, and Mr. Hurst nothing at all. The former was divided between admiration of the brilliancy which exercise had given to her complexion, and doubt as to the occasion's justifying her coming so far alone. The latter was thinking only of his breakfast. 
Her inquiries after her sister were not very favourably answered. Miss Bennet had slept ill, and though up, was very feverish, and not well enough to leave her room. Elizabeth was glad to be taken to her immediately; and Jane, who had only been withheld by the fear of giving alarm or inconvenience from expressing in her note how much she longed for such a visit, was delighted at her entrance. She was not equal, however, to much conversation, and when Miss Bingley left them together, could attempt little besides expressions of gratitude for the extraordinary kindness she was treated with. Elizabeth silently attended her. 
When breakfast was over they were joined by the sisters; and Elizabeth began to like them herself, when she saw how much affection and solicitude they showed for Jane. The apothecary came, and having examined his patient, said, as might be supposed, that she had caught a violent cold, and that they must endeavour to get the better of it; advised her to return to bed, and promised her some draughts. The advice was followed readily, for the feverish symptoms increased, and her head ached acutely. Elizabeth did not quit her room for a moment; nor were the other ladies often absent; the gentlemen being out, they had, in fact, nothing to do elsewhere. 
When the clock struck three, Elizabeth felt that she must go, and very unwillingly said so. Miss Bingley offered her the carriage, and she only wanted a little pressing to accept it, when Jane testified such concern in parting with her, that Miss Bingley was obliged to convert the offer of the chaise to an invitation to remain at Netherfield for the present. Elizabeth most thankfully consented, and a servant was dispatched to Longbourn to acquaint the family with her stay and bring back a supply of clothes. 
Chapter 8
At five o'clock the two ladies retired to dress, and at half-past six Elizabeth was summoned to dinner. To the civil inquiries which then poured in, and amongst which she had the pleasure of distinguishing the much superior solicitude of Mr. Bingley's, she could not make a very favourable answer. Jane was by no means better. The sisters, on hearing this, repeated three or four times how much they were grieved, how shocking it was to have a bad cold, and how excessively they disliked being ill themselves; and then thought no more of the matter: and their indifference towards Jane when not immediately before them restored Elizabeth to the enjoyment of all her former dislike. 
Their brother, indeed, was the only one of the party whom she could regard with any complacency. His anxiety for Jane was evident, and his attentions to herself most pleasing, and they prevented her feeling herself so much an intruder as she believed she was considered by the others. She had very little notice from any but him. Miss Bingley was engrossed by Mr. Darcy, her sister scarcely less so; and as for Mr. Hurst, by whom Elizabeth sat, he was an indolent man, who lived only to eat, drink, and play at cards; who, when he found her to prefer a plain dish to a ragout, had nothing to say to her. 
When dinner was over, she returned directly to Jane, and Miss Bingley began abusing her as soon as she was out of the room. Her manners were pronounced to be very bad indeed, a mixture of pride and impertinence; she had no conversation, no style, no beauty. Mrs. Hurst thought the same, and added: 
"She has nothing, in short, to recommend her, but being an excellent walker. I shall never forget her appearance this morning. She really looked almost wild." 
"She did, indeed, Louisa. I could hardly keep my countenance. Very nonsensical to come at all! Why must SHE be scampering about the country, because her sister had a cold? Her hair, so untidy, so blowsy!" 
"Yes, and her petticoat; I hope you saw her petticoat, six inches deep in mud, I am absolutely certain; and the gown which had been let down to hide it not doing its office." 
"Your picture may be very exact, Louisa," said Bingley; "but this was all lost upon me. I thought Miss Elizabeth Bennet looked remarkably well when she came into the room this morning. Her dirty petticoat quite escaped my notice." 
"YOU observed it, Mr. Darcy, I am sure," said Miss Bingley; "and I am inclined to think that you would not wish to see YOUR sister make such an exhibition." 
"Certainly not." 
"To walk three miles, or four miles, or five miles, or whatever it is, above her ankles in dirt, and alone, quite alone! What could she mean by it? It seems to me to show an abominable sort of conceited independence, a most country-town indifference to decorum." 
"It shows an affection for her sister that is very pleasing," said Bingley. 
"I am afraid, Mr. Darcy," observed Miss Bingley in a half whisper, "that this adventure has rather affected your admiration of her fine eyes." 
"Not at all," he replied; "they were brightened by the exercise." A short pause followed this speech, and Mrs. Hurst began again: 
"I have a excessive regard for Miss Jane Bennet, she is really a very sweet girl, and I wish with all my heart she were well settled. But with such a father and mother, and such low connections, I am afraid there is no chance of it." 
"I think I have heard you say that their uncle is an attorney on Meryton." 
"Yes; and they have another, who lives somewhere near Cheapside." 
"That is capital," added her sister, and they both laughed heartily. 
"If they had uncles enough to fill ALL Cheapside," cried Bingley, "it would not make them one jot less agreeable." 
"But it must very materially lessen their chance of marrying men of any consideration in the world," replied Darcy. 
To this speech Bingley made no answer; but his sisters gave it their hearty assent, and indulged their mirth for some time at the expense of their dear friend's vulgar relations. 
With a renewal of tenderness, however, they returned to her room on leaving the dining-parlour, and sat with her till summoned to coffee. She was still very poorly, and Elizabeth would not quit her at all, till late in the evening, when she had the comfort of seeing her sleep, and when it seemed to her rather right than pleasant that she should go downstairs herself. On entering the drawing-room she found the whole party at loo, and was immediately invited to join them; but suspecting them to be playing high she declined it, and making her sister the excuse, said she would amuse herself for the short time she could stay below, with a book. Mr. Hurst looked at her with astonishment. 
"Do you prefer reading to cards?" said he; "that is rather singular." 
"Miss Eliza Bennet," said Miss Bingley, "despises cards. She is a great reader, and has no pleasure in anything else." 
"I deserve neither such praise nor such censure," cried Elizabeth; "I am NOT a great reader, and I have pleasure in many things." 
"In nursing your sister I am sure you have pleasure," said Bingley; "and I hope it will be soon increased by seeing her quite well." 
Elizabeth thanked him from her heart, and then walked towards the table where a few books were lying. He immediately offered to fetch her others\97all that his library afforded. 
"And I wish my collection were larger for your benefit and my own credit; but I am an idle fellow, and though I have not many, I have more than I ever looked into." 
Elizabeth assured him that she could suit herself perfectly with those in the room. 
"I am astonished," said Miss Bingley, "that my father should have left so small a collection of books. What a delightful library you have at Pemberley, Mr. Darcy!" 
"It ought to be good," he replied, "it has been the work of many generations." 
"And then you have added so much to it yourself, you are always buying books." 
"I cannot comprehend the neglect of a family library in such days as these." 
"Neglect! I am sure you neglect nothing that can add to the beauties of that noble place. Charles, when you build YOUR house, I wish it may be half as delightful as Pemberley." 
"I wish it may." 
"But I would really advise you to make your purchase in that neighbourhood, and take Pemberley for a kind of model. There is not a finer county in England than Derbyshire." 
"With all my heart; I will buy Pemberley itself if Darcy will sell it." 
"I am talking of possibilities, Charles." 
"Upon my word, Caroline, I should think it more possible to get Pemberley by purchase than by imitation." 
Elizabeth was so much caught with what passed, as to leave her very little attention for her book; and soon laying it wholly aside, she drew near the card-table, and stationed herself between Mr. Bingley and his eldest sister, to observe the game." 
"Is Miss Darcy much grown since the spring?" said Miss Bingley; "will she be as tall as I am?" 
"I think she will. She is now about Miss Elizabeth Bennet's height, or rather taller." 
"How I long to see her again! I never met with anybody who delighted me so much. Such a countenance, such manners! And so extremely accomplished for her age! Her performance on the pianoforte is exquisite." 
"It is amazing to me," said Bingley, "how young ladies can have patience to be so very accomplished as they all are." 
"All young ladies accomplished! My dear Charles, what do you mean?" 
"Yes, all of them, I think. They all paint tables, cover screens, and net purses. I scarcely know anyone who cannot do all this, and I am sure I never heard a young lady spoken of for the first time, without being informed that she was very accomplished." 
"Your list of the common extent of accomplishments," said Darcy, "has too much truth. The word is applied to many a woman who deserves it no otherwise than by netting a purse or covering a screen. But I am very far from agreeing with you in your estimation of ladies in general. I cannot boast of knowing more than half-a-dozen, in the whole range of my acquaintance, that are really accomplished." 
"Nor I, I am sure," said Miss Bingley. 
"Then," observed Elizabeth, "you must comprehend a great deal in your idea of an accomplished woman." 
"Yes, I do comprehend a great deal in it." 
"Oh! certainly," cried his faithful assistant, "no one can be really esteemed accomplished who does not greatly surpass what is usually met with. A woman must have a thorough knowledge of music, singing, drawing, dancing, and the modern languages, to deserve the word; and besides all this, she must possess a certain something in her air and manner of walking, the tone of her voice, her address and expressions, or the word will be but half-deserved." 
"All this she must possess," added Darcy, "and to all this she must yet add something more substantial, in the improvement of her mind by extensive reading." 
"I am no longer surprised at your knowing ONLY six accomplished women. I rather wonder now at your knowing ANY." 
"Are you so severe upon your own sex as to doubt the possibility of all this? 
"I never saw such a woman. I never saw such capacity, and taste, and application, and elegance, as you describe united." 
Mrs. Hurst and Miss Bingley both cried out against the injustice of her implied doubt, and were both protesting that they knew many women who answered this description, when Mr. Hurst called them to order, with bitter complaints of their inattention to what was going forward. As all conversation was thereby at an end, Elizabeth soon afterwards left the room. 
"Elizabeth Bennet," said Miss Bingley, when the door was closed on her, "is one of those young ladies who seek to recommend themselves to the other sex by undervaluing their own; and with many men, I dare say, it succeeds. But, in my opinion, it is a paltry device, a very mean art." 
"Undoubtedly," replied Darcy, to whom this remark was chiefly addressed, "there is a meanness in ALL the arts which ladies sometimes condescend to employ for captivation. Whatever bears affinity to cunning is despicable." 
Miss Bingley was not so entirely satisfied with this reply as to continue the subject. 
Elizabeth joined them again only to say that her sister was worse, and that she could not leave her. Bingley urged Mr. Jones being sent for immediately; while his sisters, convinced that no country advice could be of any service, recommended an express to town for one of the most eminent physicians. This she would not hear of; but she was not so unwilling to comply with their brother's proposal; and it was settled that Mr. Jones should be sent for early in the morning, if Miss Bennet were not decidedly better. Bingley was quite uncomfortable; his sisters declared that they were miserable. They solaced their wretchedness, however, by duets after supper, while he could find no better relief to his feelings than by giving his housekeeper directions that every attention might be paid to the sick lady and her sister. 
Chapter 9
Elizabeth passed the chief of the night in her sister's room, and in the morning had the pleasure of being able to send a tolerable answer to the inquiries which she very early received from Mr. Bingley by a housemaid, and some time afterwards from the two elegant ladies who waited on his sisters. In spite of this amendment, however, she requested to have a note sent to Longbourn, desiring her mother to visit Jane, and form her own judgement of her situation. The note was immediately dispatched, and its contents as quickly complied with. Mrs. Bennet, accompanied by her two youngest girls, reached Netherfield soon after the family breakfast. 
Had she found Jane in any apparent danger, Mrs. Bennet would have been very miserable; but being satisfied on seeing her that her illness was not alarming, she had no wish of her recovering immediately, as her restoration to health would probably remove her from Netherfield. She would not listen, therefore, to her daughter's proposal of being carried home; neither did the apothecary, who arrived about the same time, think it at all advisable. After sitting a little while with Jane, on Miss Bingley's appearance and invitation, the mother and three daughter all attended her into the breakfast parlour. Bingley met them with hopes that Mrs. Bennet had not found Miss Bennet worse than she expected. 
"Indeed I have, sir," was her answer. "She is a great deal too ill to be moved. Mr. Jones says we must not think of moving her. We must trespass a little longer on your kindness." 
"Removed!" cried Bingley. "It must not be thought of. My sister, I am sure, will not hear of her removal." 
"You may depend upon it, Madam," said Miss Bingley, with cold civility, "that Miss Bennet will receive every possible attention while she remains with us." 
Mrs. Bennet was profuse in her acknowledgements. 
"I am sure," she added, "if it was not for such good friends I do not know what would become of her, for she is very ill indeed, and suffers a vast deal, though with the greatest patience in the world, which is always the way with her, for she has, without exception, the sweetest temper I have ever met with. I often tell my other girls they are nothing to HER. You have a sweet room here, Mr. Bingley, and a charming prospect over the gravel walk. I do not know a place in the country that is equal to Netherfield. You will not think of quitting it in a hurry, I hope, though you have but a short lease." 
"Whatever I do is done in a hurry," replied he; "and therefore if I should resolve to quit Netherfield, I should probably be off in five minutes. At present, however, I consider myself as quite fixed here." 
"That is exactly what I should have supposed of you," said Elizabeth. 
"You begin to comprehend me, do you?" cried he, turning towards her. 
"Oh! yes\97I understand you perfectly." 
"I wish I might take this for a compliment; but to be so easily seen through I am afraid is pitiful." 
"That is as it happens. It does not follow that a deep, intricate character is more or less estimable than such a one as yours." 
"Lizzy," cried her mother, "remember where you are, and do not run on in the wild manner that you are suffered to do at home." 
"I did not know before," continued Bingley immediately, "that your were a studier of character. It must be an amusing study." 
"Yes, but intricate characters are the MOST amusing. They have at least that advantage." 
"The country," said Darcy, "can in general supply but a few subjects for such a study. In a country neighbourhood you move in a very confined and unvarying society." 
"But people themselves alter so much, that there is something new to be observed in them for ever." 
"Yes, indeed," cried Mrs. Bennet, offended by his manner of mentioning a country neighbourhood. "I assure you there is quite as much of THAT going on in the country as in town." 
Everybody was surprised, and Darcy, after looking at her for a moment, turned silently away. Mrs. Bennet, who fancied she had gained a complete victory over him, continued her triumph. 
"I cannot see that London has any great advantage over the country, for my part, except the shops and public places. The country is a vast deal pleasanter, is it not, Mr. Bingley?" 
"When I am in the country," he replied, "I never wish to leave it; and when I am in town it is pretty much the same. They have each their advantages, and I can be equally happy in either." 
"Aye\97that is because you have the right disposition. But that gentleman," looking at Darcy, "seemed to think the country was nothing at all." 
"Indeed, Mamma, you are mistaken," said Elizabeth, blushing for her mother. "You quite mistook Mr. Darcy. He only meant that there was not such a variety of people to be met with in the country as in the town, which you must acknowledge to be true." 
"Certainly, my dear, nobody said there were; but as to not meeting with many people in this neighbourhood, I believe there are few neighbourhoods larger. I know we dine with four-and-twenty families." 
Nothing but concern for Elizabeth could enable Bingley to keep his countenance. His sister was less delicate, and directed her eyes towards Mr. Darcy with a very expressive smile. Elizabeth, for the sake of saying something that might turn her mother's thoughts, now asked her if Charlotte Lucas had been at Longbourn since HER coming away. 
"Yes, she called yesterday with her father. What an agreeable man Sir William is, Mr. Bingley, is not he? So much the man of fashion! So genteel and easy! He had always something to say to everybody. THAT is my idea of good breeding; and those persons who fancy themselves very important, and never open their mouths, quite mistake the matter." 
"Did Charlotte dine with you?" 
"No, she would go home. I fancy she was wanted about the mince-pies. For my part, Mr. Bingley, I always keep servants that can do their own work; MY daughters are brought up very differently. But everybody is to judge for themselves, and the Lucases are a very good sort of girls, I assure you. It is a pity they are not handsome! Not that I think Charlotte so VERY plain\97but then she is our particular friend." 
"She seems a very pleasant young woman." 
"Oh! dear, yes; but you must own she is very plain. Lady Lucas herself has often said so, and envied me Jane's beauty. I do not like to boast of my own child, but to be sure, Jane\97one does not often see anybody better looking. It is what everybody says. I do not trust my own partiality. When she was only fifteen, there was a man at my brother Gardiner's in town so much in love with her that my sister-in-law was sure he would make her an offer before we came away. But, however, he did not. Perhaps he thought her too young. However, he wrote some verses on her, and very pretty they were." 
"And so ended his affection," said Elizabeth impatiently. "There has been many a one, I fancy, overcome in the same way. I wonder who first discovered the efficacy of poetry in driving away love!" 
"I have been used to consider poetry as the FOOD of love," said Darcy. 
"Of a fine, stout, healthy love it may. Everything nourishes what is strong already. But if it be only a slight, thin sort of inclination, I am convinced that one good sonnet will starve it entirely away." 
Darcy only smiled; and the general pause which ensued made Elizabeth tremble lest her mother should be exposing herself again. She longed to speak, but could think of nothing to say; and after a short silence Mrs. Bennet began repeating her thanks to Mr. Bingley for his kindness to Jane, with an apology for troubling him also with Lizzy. Mr. Bingley was unaffectedly civil in his answer, and forced his younger sister to be civil also, and say what the occasion required. She performed her part indeed without much graciousness, but Mrs. Bennet was satisfied, and soon afterwards ordered her carriage. Upon this signal, the youngest of her daughters put herself forward. The two girls had been whispering to each other during the whole visit, and the result of it was, that the youngest should tax Mr. Bingley with having promised on his first coming into the country to give a ball at Netherfield. 
Lydia was a stout, well-grown girl of fifteen, with a fine complexion and good-humoured countenance; a favourite with her mother, whose affection had brought her into public at an early age. She had high animal spirits, and a sort of natural self-consequence, which the attention of the officers, to whom her uncle's good dinners, and her own easy manners recommended her, had increased into assurance. She was very equal, therefore, to address Mr. Bingley on the subject of the ball, and abruptly reminded him of his promise; adding, that it would be the most shameful thing in the world if he did not keep it. His answer to this sudden attack was delightful to their mother's ear: 
"I am perfectly ready, I assure you, to keep my engagement; and when your sister is recovered, you shall, if you please, name the very day of the ball. But you would not wish to be dancing when she is ill." 
Lydia declared herself satisfied. "Oh! yes\97it would be much better to wait till Jane was well, and by that time most likely Captain Carter would be at Meryton again. And when you have given YOUR ball," she added, "I shall insist on their giving one also. I shall tell Colonel Forster it will be quite a shame if he does not." 
Mrs. Bennet and her daughters then departed, and Elizabeth returned instantly to Jane, leaving her own and her relations' behaviour to the remarks of the two ladies and Mr. Darcy; the latter of whom, however, could not be prevailed on to join in their censure of HER, in spite of all Miss Bingley's witticisms on FINE EYES. 
Chapter 10
The day passed much as the day before had done. Mrs. Hurst and Miss Bingley had spent some hours of the morning with the invalid, who continued, though slowly, to mend; and in the evening Elizabeth joined their party in the drawing-room. The loo-table, however, did not appear. Mr. Darcy was writing, and Miss Bingley, seated near him, was watching the progress of his letter and repeatedly calling off his attention by messages to his sister. Mr. Hurst and Mr. Bingley were at piquet, and Mrs. Hurst was observing their game. 
Elizabeth took up some needlework, and was sufficiently amused in attending to what passed between Darcy and his companion. The perpetual commendations of the lady, either on his handwriting, or on the evenness of his lines, or on the length of his letter, with the perfect unconcern with which her praises were received, formed a curious dialogue, and was exactly in union with her opinion of each. 
"How delighted Miss Darcy will be to receive such a letter!" 
He made no answer. 
"You write uncommonly fast." 
"You are mistaken. I write rather slowly." 
"How many letters you must have occasion to write in the course of a year! Letters of business, too! How odious I should think them!" 
"It is fortunate, then, that they fall to my lot instead of yours." 
"Pray tell your sister that I long to see her." 
"I have already told her so once, by your desire." 
"I am afraid you do not like your pen. Let me mend it for you. I mend pens remarkably well." 
"Thank you\97but I always mend my own." 
"How can you contrive to write so even?" 
He was silent. 
"Tell your sister I am delighted to hear of her improvement on the harp; and pray let her know that I am quite in raptures with her beautiful little design for a table, and I think it infinitely superior to Miss Grantley's." 
"Will you give me leave to defer your raptures till I write again? At present I have not room to do them justice." 
"Oh! it is of no consequence. I shall see her in January. But do you always write such charming long letters to her, Mr. Darcy?" 
"They are generally long; but whether always charming it is not for me to determine." 
"It is a rule with me, that a person who can write a long letter with ease, cannot write ill." 
"That will not do for a compliment to Darcy, Caroline," cried her brother, "because he does NOT write with ease. He studies too much for words of four syllables. Do not you, Darcy?" 
"My style of writing is very different from yours." 
"Oh!" cried Miss Bingley, "Charles writes in the most careless way imaginable. He leaves out half his words, and blots the rest." 
"My ideas flow so rapidly that I have not time to express them\97by which means my letters sometimes convey no ideas at all to my correspondents." 
"Your humility, Mr. Bingley," said Elizabeth, "must disarm reproof." 
"Nothing is more deceitful," said Darcy, "than the appearance of humility. It is often only carelessness of opinion, and sometimes an indirect boast." 
"And which of the two do you call MY little recent piece of modesty?" 
"The indirect boast; for you are really proud of your defects in writing, because you consider them as proceeding from a rapidity of thought and carelessness of execution, which, if not estimable, you think at least highly interesting. The power of doing anything with quickness is always prized much by the possessor, and often without any attention to the imperfection of the performance. When you told Mrs. Bennet this morning that if you ever resolved upon quitting Netherfield you should be gone in five minutes, you meant it to be a sort of panegyric, of compliment to yourself\97and yet what is there so very laudable in a precipitance which must leave very necessary business undone, and can be of no real advantage to yourself or anyone else?" 
"Nay," cried Bingley, "this is too much, to remember at night all the foolish things that were said in the morning. And yet, upon my honour, I believe what I said of myself to be true, and I believe it at this moment. At least, therefore, I did not assume the character of needless precipitance merely to show off before the ladies." 
"I dare say you believed it; but I am by no means convinced that you would be gone with such celerity. Your conduct would be quite as dependent on chance as that of any man I know; and if, as you were mounting your horse, a friend were to say, 'Bingley, you had better stay till next week,' you would probably do it, you would probably not go\97and at another word, might stay a month." 
"You have only proved by this," cried Elizabeth, "that Mr. Bingley did not do justice to his own disposition. You have shown him off now much more than he did himself." 
"I am exceedingly gratified," said Bingley, "by your converting what my friend says into a compliment on the sweetness of my temper. But I am afraid you are giving it a turn which that gentleman did by no means intend; for he would certainly think better of me, if under such a circumstance I were to give a flat denial, and ride off as fast as I could." 
"Would Mr. Darcy then consider the rashness of your original intentions as atoned for by your obstinacy in adhering to it?" 
"Upon my word, I cannot exactly explain the matter; Darcy must speak for himself." 
"You expect me to account for opinions which you choose to call mine, but which I have never acknowledged. Allowing the case, however, to stand according to your representation, you must remember, Miss Bennet, that the friend who is supposed to desire his return to the house, and the delay of his plan, has merely desired it, asked it without offering one argument in favour of its propriety." 
"To yield readily\97easily\97to the PERSUASION of a friend is no merit with you." 
"To yield without conviction is no compliment to the understanding of either." 
"You appear to me, Mr. Darcy, to allow nothing for the influence of friendship and affection. A regard for the requester would often make one readily yield to a request, without waiting for arguments to reason one into it. I am not particularly speaking of such a case as you have supposed about Mr. Bingley. We may as well wait, perhaps, till the circumstance occurs before we discuss the discretion of his behaviour thereupon. But in general and ordinary cases between friend and friend, where one of them is desired by the other to change a resolution of no very great moment, should you think ill of that person for complying with the desire, without waiting to be argued into it?" 
"Will it not be advisable, before we proceed on this subject, to arrange with rather more precision the degree of importance which is to appertain to this request, as well as the degree of intimacy subsisting between the parties?" 
"By all means," cried Bingley; "let us hear all the particulars, not forgetting their comparative height and size; for that will have more weight in the argument, Miss Bennet, than you may be aware of. I assure you, that if Darcy were not such a great tall fellow, in comparison with myself, I should not pay him half so much deference. I declare I do not know a more awful object than Darcy, on particular occasions, and in particular places; at his own house especially, and of a Sunday evening, when he has nothing to do." 
Mr. Darcy smiled; but Elizabeth thought she could perceive that he was rather offended, and therefore checked her laugh. Miss Bingley warmly resented the indignity he had received, in an expostulation with her brother for talking such nonsense. 
"I see your design, Bingley," said his friend. "You dislike an argument, and want to silence this." 
"Perhaps I do. Arguments are too much like disputes. If you and Miss Bennet will defer yours till I am out of the room, I shall be very thankful; and then you may say whatever you like of me." 
"What you ask," said Elizabeth, "is no sacrifice on my side; and Mr. Darcy had much better finish his letter." 
Mr. Darcy took her advice, and did finish his letter. 
When that business was over, he applied to Miss Bingley and Elizabeth for an indulgence of some music. Miss Bingley moved with some alacrity to the pianoforte; and, after a polite request that Elizabeth would lead the way which the other as politely and more earnestly negatived, she seated herself. 
Mrs. Hurst sang with her sister, and while they were thus employed, Elizabeth could not help observing, as she turned over some music-books that lay on the instrument, how frequently Mr. Darcy's eyes were fixed on her. She hardly knew how to suppose that she could be an object of admiration to so great a man; and yet that he should look at her because he disliked her, was still more strange. She could only imagine, however, at last that she drew his notice because there was something more wrong and reprehensible, according to his ideas of right, than in any other person present. The supposition did not pain her. She liked him too little to care for his approbation. 
After playing some Italian songs, Miss Bingley varied the charm by a lively Scotch air; and soon afterwards Mr. Darcy, drawing near Elizabeth, said to her: 
"Do not you feel a great inclination, Miss Bennet, to seize such an opportunity of dancing a reel?" 
She smiled, but made no answer. He repeated the question, with some surprise at her silence. 
"Oh!" said she, "I heard you before, but I could not immediately determine what to say in reply. You wanted me, I know, to say 'Yes,' that you might have the pleasure of despising my taste; but I always delight in overthrowing those kind of schemes, and cheating a person of their premeditated contempt. I have, therefore, made up my mind to tell you, that I do not want to dance a reel at all\97and now despise me if you dare." 
"Indeed I do not dare." 
Elizabeth, having rather expected to affront him, was amazed at his gallantry; but there was a mixture of sweetness and archness in her manner which made it difficult for her to affront anybody; and Darcy had never been so bewitched by any woman as he was by her. He really believed, that were it not for the inferiority of her connections, he should be in some danger. 
Miss Bingley saw, or suspected enough to be jealous; and her great anxiety for the recovery of her dear friend Jane received some assistance from her desire of getting rid of Elizabeth. 
She often tried to provoke Darcy into disliking her guest, by talking of their supposed marriage, and planning his happiness in such an alliance. 
"I hope," said she, as they were walking together in the shrubbery the next day, "you will give your mother-in-law a few hints, when this desirable event takes place, as to the advantage of holding her tongue; and if you can compass it, do sure the younger girls of running after officers. And, if I may mention so delicate a subject, endeavour to check that little something, bordering on conceit and impertinence, which your lady possesses." 
"Have you anything else to propose for my domestic felicity?" 
"Oh! yes. Do let the portraits of your uncle and aunt Phillips be placed in the gallery at Pemberley. Put them next to your great-uncle the judge. They are in the same profession, you know, only in different lines. As for your Elizabeth's picture, you must not have it taken, for what painter could do justice to those beautiful eyes?" 
"It would not be easy, indeed, to catch their expression, but their colour and shape, and the eyelashes, so remarkably fine, might be copied." 
At that moment they were met from another walk by Mrs. Hurst and Elizabeth herself. 
"I did not know that you intended to walk," said Miss Bingley, in some confusion, lest they had been overheard. 
"You used us abominably ill," answered Mrs. Hurst, "running away without telling us that you were coming out." 
Then taking the disengaged arm of Mr. Darcy, she left Elizabeth to walk by herself. The path just admitted three. Mr. Darcy felt their rudeness, and immediately said: 
"This walk is not wide enough for our party. We had better go into the avenue." 
But Elizabeth, who had not the least inclination to remain with them, laughingly answered: 
"No, no; stay where you are. You are charmingly grouped, and appear to uncommon advantage. The picturesque would be spoilt by admitting a fourth. Good-bye." 
She then ran gaily off, rejoicing as she rambled about, in the hope of being at home again in a day or two. Jane was already so much recovered as to intend leaving her room for a couple of hours that evening. 
Chapter 11
When the ladies removed after dinner, Elizabeth ran up to her sister, and seeing her well guarded from cold, attended her into the drawing-room, where she was welcomed by her two friends with many professions of pleasure; and Elizabeth had never seen them so agreeable as they were during the hour which passed before the gentlemen appeared. Their powers of conversation were considerable. They could describe an entertainment with accuracy, relate an anecdote with humour, and laugh at their acquaintance with spirit. 
But when the gentlemen entered, Jane was no longer the first object; Miss Bingley's eyes were instantly turned toward Darcy, and she had something to say to him before he had advanced many steps. He addressed himself to Miss Bennet, with a polite congratulation; Mr. Hurst also made her a slight bow, and said he was "very glad;" but diffuseness and warmth remained for Bingley's salutation. He was full of joy and attention. The first half-hour was spent in piling up the fire, lest she should suffer from the change of room; and she removed at his desire to the other side of the fireplace, that she might be further from the door. He then sat down by her, and talked scarcely to anyone else. Elizabeth, at work in the opposite corner, saw it all with great delight. 
When tea was over, Mr. Hurst reminded his sister-in-law of the card-table\97but in vain. She had obtained private intelligence that Mr. Darcy did not wish for cards; and Mr. Hurst soon found even his open petition rejected. She assured him that no one intended to play, and the silence of the whole party on the subject seemed to justify her. Mr. Hurst had therefore nothing to do, but to stretch himself on one of the sofas and go to sleep. Darcy took up a book; Miss Bingley did the same; and Mrs. Hurst, principally occupied in playing with her bracelets and rings, joined now and then in her brother's conversation with Miss Bennet. 
Miss Bingley's attention was quite as much engaged in watching Mr. Darcy's progress through HIS book, as in reading her own; and she was perpetually either making some inquiry, or looking at his page. She could not win him, however, to any conversation; he merely answered her question, and read on. At length, quite exhausted by the attempt to be amused with her own book, which she had only chosen because it was the second volume of his, she gave a great yawn and said, "How pleasant it is to spend an evening in this way! I declare after all there is no enjoyment like reading! How much sooner one tires of anything than of a book! When I have a house of my own, I shall be miserable if I have not an excellent library." 
No one made any reply. She then yawned again, threw aside her book, and cast her eyes round the room in quest for some amusement; when hearing her brother mentioning a ball to Miss Bennet, she turned suddenly towards him and said: 
"By the bye, Charles, are you really serious in meditating a dance at Netherfield? I would advise you, before you determine on it, to consult the wishes of the present party; I am much mistaken if there are not some among us to whom a ball would be rather a punishment than a pleasure." 
"If you mean Darcy," cried her brother, "he may go to bed, if he chooses, before it begins\97but as for the ball, it is quite a settled thing; and as soon as Nicholls has made white soup enough, I shall send round my cards." 
"I should like balls infinitely better," she replied, "if they were carried on in a different manner; but there is something insufferably tedious in the usual process of such a meeting. It would surely be much more rational if conversation instead of dancing were made the order of the day." 
"Much more rational, my dear Caroline, I dare say, but it would not be near so much like a ball." 
Miss Bingley made no answer, and soon afterwards she got up and walked about the room. Her figure was elegant, and she walked well; but Darcy, at whom it was all aimed, was still inflexibly studious. In the desperation of her feelings, she resolved on one effort more, and, turning to Elizabeth, said: 
"Miss Eliza Bennet, let me persuade you to follow my example, and take a turn about the room. I assure you it is very refreshing after sitting so long in one attitude." 
Elizabeth was surprised, but agreed to it immediately. Miss Bingley succeeded no less in the real object of her civility; Mr. Darcy looked up. He was as much awake to the novelty of attention in that quarter as Elizabeth herself could be, and unconsciously closed his book. He was directly invited to join their party, but he declined it, observing that he could imagine but two motives for their choosing to walk up and down the room together, with either of which motives his joining them would interfere. "What could he mean? She was dying to know what could be his meaning?"\97and asked Elizabeth whether she could at all understand him? 
"Not at all," was her answer; "but depend upon it, he means to be severe on us, and our surest way of disappointing him will be to ask nothing about it." 
Miss Bingley, however, was incapable of disappointing Mr. Darcy in anything, and persevered therefore in requiring an explanation of his two motives. 
"I have not the smallest objection to explaining them," said he, as soon as she allowed him to speak. "You either choose this method of passing the evening because you are in each other's confidence, and have secret affairs to discuss, or because you are conscious that your figures appear to the greatest advantage in walking; if the first, I would be completely in your way, and if the second, I can admire you much better as I sit by the fire." 
"Oh! shocking!" cried Miss Bingley. "I never heard anything so abominable. How shall we punish him for such a speech?" 
"Nothing so easy, if you have but the inclination," said Elizabeth. "We can all plague and punish one another. Tease him\97laugh at him. Intimate as you are, you must know how it is to be done." 
"But upon my honour, I do NOT. I do assure you that my intimacy has not yet taught me THAT. Tease calmness of manner and presence of mind! No, no\97feel he may defy us there. And as to laughter, we will not expose ourselves, if you please, by attempting to laugh without a subject. Mr. Darcy may hug himself." 
"Mr. Darcy is not to be laughed at!" cried Elizabeth. "That is an uncommon advantage, and uncommon I hope it will continue, for it would be a great loss to ME to have many such acquaintances. I dearly love a laugh." 
"Miss Bingley," said he, "has given me more credit than can be. The wisest and the best of men\97nay, the wisest and best of their actions\97may be rendered ridiculous by a person whose first object in life is a joke." 
"Certainly," replied Elizabeth\97"there are such people, but I hope I am not one of THEM. I hope I never ridicule what is wise and good. Follies and nonsense, whims and inconsistencies, DO divert me, I own, and I laugh at them whenever I can. But these, I suppose, are precisely what you are without." 
"Perhaps that is not possible for anyone. But it has been the study of my life to avoid those weaknesses which often expose a strong understanding to ridicule." 
"Such as vanity and pride." 
"Yes, vanity is a weakness indeed. But pride\97where there is a real superiority of mind, pride will be always under good regulation." 
Elizabeth turned away to hide a smile. 
"Your examination of Mr. Darcy is over, I presume," said Miss Bingley; "and pray what is the result?" 
"I am perfectly convinced by it that Mr. Darcy has no defect. He owns it himself without disguise." 
"No," said Darcy, "I have made no such pretension. I have faults enough, but they are not, I hope, of understanding. My temper I dare not vouch for. It is, I believe, too little yielding\97certainly too little for the convenience of the world. I cannot forget the follies and vices of other so soon as I ought, nor their offenses against myself. My feelings are not puffed about with every attempt to move them. My temper would perhaps be called resentful. My good opinion once lost, is lost forever." 
"THAT is a failing indeed!" cried Elizabeth. "Implacable resentment IS a shade in a character. But you have chosen your fault well. I really cannot LAUGH at it. You are safe from me." 
"There is, I believe, in every disposition a tendency to some particular evil\97a natural defect, which not even the best education can overcome." 
"And YOUR defect is to hate everybody." 
"And yours," he replied with a smile, "is willfully to misunderstand them." 
"Do let us have a little music," cried Miss Bingley, tired of a conversation in which she had no share. "Louisa, you will not mind my waking Mr. Hurst?" 
Her sister had not the smallest objection, and the pianoforte was opened; and Darcy, after a few moments' recollection, was not sorry for it. He began to feel the danger of paying Elizabeth too much attention. 
Chapter 12
In consequence of an agreement between the sisters, Elizabeth wrote the next morning to their mother, to beg that the carriage might be sent for them in the course of the day. But Mrs. Bennet, who had calculated on her daughters remaining at Netherfield till the following Tuesday, which would exactly finish Jane's week, could not bring herself to receive them with pleasure before. Her answer, therefore, was not propitious, at least not to Elizabeth's wishes, for she was impatient to get home. Mrs. Bennet sent them word that they could not possibly have the carriage before Tuesday; and in her postscript it was added, that if Mr. Bingley and his sister pressed them to stay longer, she could spare them very well. Against staying longer, however, Elizabeth was positively resolved\97nor did she much expect it would be asked; and fearful, on the contrary, as being considered as intruding themselves needlessly long, she urged Jane to borrow Mr. Bingley's carriage immediately, and at length it was settled that their original design of leaving Netherfield that morning should be mentioned, and the request made. 
The communication excited many professions of concern; and enough was said of wishing them to stay at least till the following day to work on Jane; and till the morrow their going was deferred. Miss Bingley was then sorry that she had proposed the delay, for her jealousy and dislike of one sister much exceeded her affection for the other. 
The master of the house heard with real sorrow that they were to go so soon, and repeatedly tried to persuade Miss Bennet that it would not be safe for her\97that she was not enough recovered; but Jane was firm where she felt herself to be right. 
To Mr. Darcy it was welcome intelligence\97Elizabeth had been at Netherfield long enough. She attracted him more than he liked\97and Miss Bingley was uncivil to HER, and more teasing than usual to himself. He wisely resolved to be particularly careful that no sign of admiration should NOW escape him, nothing that could elevate her with the hope of influencing his felicity; sensible that if such an idea had been suggested, his behaviour during the last day must have material weight in confirming or crushing it. Steady to his purpose, he scarcely spoke ten words to her through the whole of Saturday, and though they were at one time left by themselves for half-an-hour, he adhered most conscientiously to his book, and would not even look at her. 
On Sunday, after morning service, the separation, so agreeable to almost all, took place. Miss Bingley's civility to Elizabeth increased at last very rapidly, as well as her affection for Jane; and when they parted, after assuring the latter of the pleasure it would always give her to see her either at Longbourn or Netherfield, and embracing her most tenderly, she even shook hands with the former. Elizabeth took leave of the whole party in the liveliest of spirits. 
They were not welcomed home very cordially by their mother. Mrs. Bennet wondered at their coming, and thought them very wrong to give so much trouble, and was sure Jane would have caught cold again. But their father, though very laconic in his expressions of pleasure, was really glad to see them; he had felt their importance in the family circle. The evening conversation, when they were all assembled, had lost much of its animation, and almost all its sense by the absence of Jane and Elizabeth. 
They found Mary, as usual, deep in the study of thorough-bass and human nature; and had some extracts to admire, and some new observations of threadbare morality to listen to. Catherine and Lydia had information for them of a different sort. Much had been done and much had been said in the regiment since the preceding Wednesday; several of the officers had dined lately with their uncle, a private had been flogged, and it had actually been hinted that colonel Foster was going to be married. 
Chapter 13
"I hope, my dear," said Mr. Bennet to his wife, as they were at breakfast the next morning, "that you have ordered a good dinner to-day, because I have reason to expect an addition to our family party." 
"Who do you mean, my dear? I know of nobody that is coming, I am sure, unless Charlotte Lucas should happen to call in\97and I hope MY dinners are good enough for her. I do not believe she often sees such at home." 
"The person of whom I speak is a gentleman, and a stranger." 
Mrs. Bennet's eyes sparkled. "A gentleman and a stranger! It is Mr. Bingley, I am sure! Well, I am sure I shall be extremely glad to see Mr. Bingley. But\97good Lord! how unlucky! There is not a bit of fish to be got to-day. Lydia, my love, ring the bell\97I must speak to Hill this moment." 
"It is NOT Mr. Bingley," said her husband; "it is a person whom I never saw in the whole course of my life." 
This roused a general astonishment; and he had the pleasure of being eagerly questioned by his wife and his five daughters at once. 
After amusing himself some time with their curiosity, he thus explained: 
"About a month ago I received this letter; and about a fortnight ago I answered it, for I thought it a case of some delicacy, and requiring early attention. It is from my cousin, Mr. Collins, who, when I am dead, may turn you all out of this house as soon as he pleases." 
"Oh! my dear," cried his wife, "I cannot bear to hear that mentioned. Pray do not talk of that odious man. I do think it is the hardest thing in the world, that your estate should be entailed away from your own children; and I am sure, if I had been you, I should have tried long ago to do something or other about it." 
Jane and Elizabeth tried to explain to her the nature of an entail. They had often attempted to do it before, but it was a subject on which Mrs. Bennet was beyond the reach of reason, and she continued to rail bitterly against the cruelty of settling an estate away from a family of five daughters, in favour of a man whom nobody cared anything about. 
"It certainly is a most iniquitous affair," said Mr. Bennet, "and nothing can clear Mr. Collins from the guilt of inheriting Longbourn. But if you will listen to his letter, you may perhaps be a little softened by his manner of expressing himself." 
"No, that I am sure I shall not; and I think it is very impertinent of him to write to you at all, and very hypocritical. I hate such false friends. Why could he not keep on quarreling with you, as his father did before him?" 
"Why, indeed; he does seem to have had some filial scruples on that head, as you will hear." 
"Hunsford, near Westerham, Kent, 15th October. 
"Dear Sir,\97 
"The disagreement subsisting between yourself and my late honoured father always gave me much uneasiness, and since I have had the misfortune to lose him, I have frequently wished to heal the breach; but for some time I was kept back by my own doubts, fearing lest it might seem disrespectful to his memory for me to be on good terms with anyone with whom it had always pleased him to be at variance.\97'There, Mrs. Bennet.'\97My mind, however, is now made up on the subject, for having received ordination at Easter, I have been so fortunate as to be distinguished by the patronage of the Right Honourable Lady Catherine de Bourgh, widow of Sir Lewis de Bourgh, whose bounty and beneficence has preferred me to the valuable rectory of this parish, where it shall be my earnest endeavour to demean myself with grateful respect towards her ladyship, and be ever ready to perform those rites and ceremonies which are instituted by the Church of England. As a clergyman, moreover, I feel it my duty to promote and establish the blessing of peace in all families within in the reach of my influence; and on these grounds I flatter myself that my present overtures are highly commendable, and that the circumstance of my being next in the entail of Longbourn estate will be kindly overlooked on your side, and not lead you to reject the offered olive-branch. I cannot be otherwise than concerned at being the means of injuring your amiable daughters, and beg leave to apologise for it, as well as to assure you of my readiness to make them every possible amends\97but of this hereafter. If you should have no objection to receive me into your house, I propose myself the satisfaction of waiting on you and your family, Monday, November 18th, by four o'clock, and shall probably trespass on your hospitality till the Saturday se'ennight following, which I can do without any inconvenience, as Lady Catherine is far from objecting to my occasional absence on a Sunday, provided that some other clergyman is engaged to do the duty of the day.\97I remain, dear sir, with respectful compliments to your lady and daughters, your well-wisher and friend, 
"WILLIAM COLLINS" 
"At four o'clock, therefore, we may expect this peace-making gentleman," said Mr. Bennet, as he folded up the letter. "He seems to be a most conscientious and polite young man, upon my word, and I doubt not will prove a valuable acquaintance, especially if Lady Catherine should be so indulgent as to let him come to us again." 
"There is some sense in what he says about the girls, however, and if he is disposed to make them any amends, I shall not be the person to discourage him." 
"Though it is difficult," said Jane, "to guess in what way he can mean to make us the atonement he thinks our due, the wish is certainly to his credit." 
Elizabeth was chiefly struck by his extraordinary deference for Lady Catherine, and his kind intention of christening, marrying, and burying his parishioners whenever it were required. 
"He must be an oddity, I think," said she. "I cannot make him out.\97There is something very pompous in his style.\97And what can he mean by apologising for being next in the entail?\97We cannot suppose he would help it if he could.\97Could he be a sensible man, sir?" 
"No, my dear, I think not. I have great hopes of finding him quite the reverse. There is a mixture of servility and self-importance in his letter, which promises well. I am impatient to see him." 
"In point of composition," said Mary, "the letter does not seem defective. The idea of the olive-branch perhaps is not wholly new, yet I think it is well expressed." 
To Catherine and Lydia, neither the letter nor its writer were in any degree interesting. It was next to impossible that their cousin should come in a scarlet coat, and it was now some weeks since they had received pleasure from the society of a man in any other colour. As for their mother, Mr. Collins's letter had done away much of her ill-will, and she was preparing to see him with a degree of composure which astonished her husband and daughters. 
Mr. Collins was punctual to his time, and was received with great politeness by the whole family. Mr. Bennet indeed said little; but the ladies were ready enough to talk, and Mr. Collins seemed neither in need of encouragement, nor inclined to be silent himself. He was a tall, heavy-looking young man of five-and-twenty. His air was grave and stately, and his manners were very formal. He had not been long seated before he complimented Mrs. Bennet on having so fine a family of daughters; said he had heard much of their beauty, but that in this instance fame had fallen short of the truth; and added, that he did not doubt her seeing them all in due time disposed of in marriage. This gallantry was not much to the taste of some of his hearers; but Mrs. Bennet, who quarreled with no compliments, answered most readily. 
"You are very kind, I am sure; and I wish with all my heart it may prove so, for else they will be destitute enough. Things are settled so oddly." 
"You allude, perhaps, to the entail of this estate." 
"Ah! sir, I do indeed. It is a grievous affair to my poor girls, you must confess. Not that I mean to find fault with YOU, for such things I know are all chance in this world. There is no knowing how estates will go when once they come to be entailed." 
"I am very sensible, madam, of the hardship to my fair cousins, and could say much on the subject, but that I am cautious of appearing forward and precipitate. But I can assure the young ladies that I come prepared to admire them. At present I will not say more; but, perhaps, when we are better acquainted\97" 
He was interrupted by a summons to dinner; and the girls smiled on each other. They were not the only objects of Mr. Collin's admiration. The hall, the dining-room, and all its furniture, were examined and praised; and his commendation of everything would have touched Mrs. Bennet's heart, but for the mortifying supposition of his viewing it all as his own future property. The dinner too in its turn was highly admired; and he begged to know to which of his fair cousins the excellency of its cooking was owing. But he was set right there by Mrs. Bennet, who assured him with some asperity that they were very well able to keep a good cook, and that her daughters had nothing to do in the kitchen. He begged pardon for having displeased her. In a softened tone she declared herself not at all offended; but he continued to apologise for about a quarter of an hour. 
Chapter 14
During dinner, Mr. Bennet scarcely spoke at all; but when the servants were withdrawn, he thought it time to have some conversation with his guest, and therefore started a subject in which he expected him to shine, by observing that he seemed very fortunate in his patroness. Lady Catherine de Bourgh's attention to his wishes, and consideration for his comfort, appeared very remarkable. Mr. Bennet could not have chosen better. Mr. Collins was eloquent in her praise. The subject elevated him to more than usual solemnity of manner, and with a most important aspect he protested that "he had never in his life witnessed such behaviour in a person of rank\97such affability and condescension, as he had himself experienced from Lady Catherine. She had been graciously pleased to approve of both of the discourses which he had already had the honour of preaching before her. She had also asked him twice to dine at Rosings, and had sent for him only the Saturday before, to make up her pool of quadrille in the evening. Lady Catherine was reckoned proud by many people he knew, but HE had never seen anything but affability in her. She had always spoken to him as she would to any other gentleman; she made not the smallest objection to his joining in the society of the neighbourhood nor to his leaving the parish occasionally for a week or two, to visit his relations. She had even condescended to advise him to marry as soon as he could, provided he chose with discretion; and had once paid him a visit in his humble parsonage, where she had perfectly approved all the alterations he had been making, and had even vouchsafed to suggest some herself\97some shelves in the closet upstairs." 
"That is all very proper and civil, I am sure," said Mrs. Bennet, "and I dare say she is a very agreeable woman. It is a pity that great ladies in general are not more like her. Does she live near you, sir?" 
"The garden in which stands my humble abode is separated only by a lane from Rosings Park, her ladyship's residence." 
"I think you said she was a widow, sir? Has she any family?" 
"She has only one daughter, the heiress of Rosings, and of very extensive property." 
"Ah!" said Mrs. Bennet, shaking her head, "then she is better off than many girls. And what sort of young lady is she? Is she handsome?" 
"She is a most charming young lady indeed. Lady Catherine herself says that, in point of true beauty, Miss de Bourgh is far superior to the handsomest of her sex, because there is that in her features which marks the young lady of distinguished birth. She is unfortunately of a sickly constitution, which has prevented her from making that progress in many accomplishments which she could not have otherwise failed of, as I am informed by the lady who superintended her education, and who still resides with them. But she is perfectly amiable, and often condescends to drive by my humble abode in her little phaeton and ponies." 
"Has she been presented? I do not remember her name among the ladies at court." 
"Her indifferent state of health unhappily prevents her being in town; and by that means, as I told Lady Catherine one day, has deprived the British court of its brightest ornaments. Her ladyship seemed pleased with the idea; and you may imagine that I am happy on every occasion to offer those little delicate compliments which are always acceptable to ladies. I have more than once observed to Lady Catherine, that her charming daughter seemed born to be a duchess, and that the most elevated rank, instead of giving her consequence, would be adorned by her. These are the kind of little things which please her ladyship, and it is a sort of attention which I conceive myself peculiarly bound to pay." 
"You judge very properly," said Mr. Bennet, "and it is happy for you that you possess the talent of flattering with delicacy. May I ask whether these pleasing attentions proceed from the impulse of the moment, or are the result of previous study?" 
"They arise chiefly from what is passing at the time, and though I sometimes amuse myself with suggesting and arranging such little elegant compliments as may be adapted to ordinary occasions, I always wish to give them as unstudied an air as possible." 
Mr. Bennet's expectations were fully answered. His cousin was as absurd as he had hoped, and he listened to him with the keenest enjoyment, maintaining at the same time the most resolute composure of countenance, and, except in an occasional glance at Elizabeth, requiring no partner in his pleasure. 
By tea-time, however, the dose had been enough, and Mr. Bennet was glad to take his guest into the drawing-room again, and, when tea was over, glad to invite him to read aloud to the ladies. Mr. Collins readily assented, and a book was produced; but, on beholding it (for everything announced it to be from a circulating library), he started back, and begging pardon, protested that he never read novels. Kitty stared at him, and Lydia exclaimed. Other books were produced, and after some deliberation he chose Fordyce's Sermons. Lydia gaped as he opened the volume, and before he had, with very monotonous solemnity, read three pages, she interrupted him with: 
"Do you know, mamma, that my uncle Phillips talks of turning away Richard; and if he does, Colonel Forster will hire him. My aunt told me so herself on Saturday. I shall walk to Meryton to-morrow to hear more about it, and to ask when Mr. Denny comes back from town." 
Lydia was bid by her two eldest sisters to hold her tongue; but Mr. Collins, much offended, laid aside his book, and said: 
"I have often observed how little young ladies are interested by books of a serious stamp, though written solely for their benefit. It amazes me, I confess; for, certainly, there can be nothing so advantageous to them as instruction. But I will no longer importune my young cousin." 
Then turning to Mr. Bennet, he offered himself as his antagonist at backgammon. Mr. Bennet accepted the challenge, observing that he acted very wisely in leaving the girls to their own trifling amusements. Mrs. Bennet and her daughters apologised most civilly for Lydia's interruption, and promised that it should not occur again, if he would resume his book; but Mr. Collins, after assuring them that he bore his young cousin no ill-will, and should never resent her behaviour as any affront, seated himself at another table with Mr. Bennet, and prepared for backgammon. 
Chapter 15
Mr. Collins was not a sensible man, and the deficiency of nature had been but little assisted by education or society; the greatest part of his life having been spent under the guidance of an illiterate and miserly father; and though he belonged to one of the universities, he had merely kept the necessary terms, without forming at it any useful acquaintance. The subjection in which his father had brought him up had given him originally great humility of manner; but it was now a good deal counteracted by the self-conceit of a weak head, living in retirement, and the consequential feelings of early and unexpected prosperity. A fortunate chance had recommended him to Lady Catherine de Bourgh when the living of Hunsford was vacant; and the respect which he felt for her high rank, and his veneration for her as his patroness, mingling with a very good opinion of himself, of his authority as a clergyman, and his right as a rector, made him altogether a mixture of pride and obsequiousness, self-importance and humility. 
Having now a good house and a very sufficient income, he intended to marry; and in seeking a reconciliation with the Longbourn family he had a wife in view, as he meant to choose one of the daughters, if he found them as handsome and amiable as they were represented by common report. This was his plan of amends\97of atonement\97for inheriting their father's estate; and he thought it an excellent one, full of eligibility and suitableness, and excessively generous and disinterested on his own part. 
His plan did not vary on seeing them. Miss Bennet's lovely face confirmed his views, and established all his strictest notions of what was due to seniority; and for the first evening SHE was his settled choice. The next morning, however, made an alteration; for in a quarter of an hour's tete-a-tete with Mrs. Bennet before breakfast, a conversation beginning with his parsonage-house, and leading naturally to the avowal of his hopes, that a mistress might be found for it at Longbourn, produced from her, amid very complaisant smiles and general encouragement, a caution against the very Jane he had fixed on. "As to her YOUNGER daughters, she could not take upon her to say\97she could not positively answer\97but she did not KNOW of any prepossession; her ELDEST daughter, she must just mention\97she felt it incumbent on her to hint, was likely to be very soon engaged." 
Mr. Collins had only to change from Jane to Elizabeth\97and it was soon done\97done while Mrs. Bennet was stirring the fire. Elizabeth, equally next to Jane in birth and beauty, succeeded her of course. 
Mrs. Bennet treasured up the hint, and trusted that she might soon have two daughters married; and the man whom she could not bear to speak of the day before was now high in her good graces. 
Lydia's intention of walking to Meryton was not forgotten; every sister except Mary agreed to go with her; and Mr. Collins was to attend them, at the request of Mr. Bennet, who was most anxious to get rid of him, and have his library to himself; for thither Mr. Collins had followed him after breakfast; and there he would continue, nominally engaged with one of the largest folios in the collection, but really talking to Mr. Bennet, with little cessation, of his house and garden at Hunsford. Such doings discomposed Mr. Bennet exceedingly. In his library he had been always sure of leisure and tranquillity; and though prepared, as he told Elizabeth, to meet with folly and conceit in every other room of the house, he was used to be free from them there; his civility, therefore, was most prompt in inviting Mr. Collins to join his daughters in their walk; and Mr. Collins, being in fact much better fitted for a walker than a reader, was extremely pleased to close his large book, and go. 
In pompous nothings on his side, and civil assents on that of his cousins, their time passed till they entered Meryton. The attention of the younger ones was then no longer to be gained by him. Their eyes were immediately wandering up in the street in quest of the officers, and nothing less than a very smart bonnet indeed, or a really new muslin in a shop window, could recall them. 
But the attention of every lady was soon caught by a young man, whom they had never seen before, of most gentlemanlike appearance, walking with another officer on the other side of the way. The officer was the very Mr. Denny concerning whose return from London Lydia came to inquire, and he bowed as they passed. All were struck with the stranger's air, all wondered who he could be; and Kitty and Lydia, determined if possible to find out, led the way across the street, under pretense of wanting something in an opposite shop, and fortunately had just gained the pavement when the two gentlemen, turning back, had reached the same spot. Mr. Denny addressed them directly, and entreated permission to introduce his friend, Mr. Wickham, who had returned with him the day before from town, and he was happy to say had accepted a commission in their corps. This was exactly as it should be; for the young man wanted only regimentals to make him completely charming. His appearance was greatly in his favour; he had all the best part of beauty, a fine countenance, a good figure, and very pleasing address. The introduction was followed up on his side by a happy readiness of conversation\97a readiness at the same time perfectly correct and unassuming; and the whole party were still standing and talking together very agreeably, when the sound of horses drew their notice, and Darcy and Bingley were seen riding down the street. On distinguishing the ladies of the group, the two gentlemen came directly towards them, and began the usual civilities. Bingley was the principal spokesman, and Miss Bennet the principal object. He was then, he said, on his way to Longbourn on purpose to inquire after her. Mr. Darcy corroborated it with a bow, and was beginning to determine not to fix his eyes on Elizabeth, when they were suddenly arrested by the sight of the stranger, and Elizabeth happening to see the countenance of both as they looked at each other, was all astonishment at the effect of the meeting. Both changed colour, one looked white, the other red. Mr. Wickham, after a few moments, touched his hat\97a salutation which Mr. Darcy just deigned to return. What could be the meaning of it? It was impossible to imagine; it was impossible not to long to know. 
In another minute, Mr. Bingley, but without seeming to have noticed what passed, took leave and rode on with his friend. 
Mr. Denny and Mr. Wickham walked with the young ladies to the door of Mr. Phillip's house, and then made their bows, in spite of Miss Lydia's pressing entreaties that they should come in, and even in spite of Mrs. Phillips's throwing up the parlour window and loudly seconding the invitation. 
Mrs. Phillips was always glad to see her nieces; and the two eldest, from their recent absence, were particularly welcome, and she was eagerly expressing her surprise at their sudden return home, which, as their own carriage had not fetched them, she should have known nothing about, if she had not happened to see Mr. Jones's shop-boy in the street, who had told her that they were not to send any more draughts to Netherfield because the Miss Bennets were come away, when her civility was claimed towards Mr. Collins by Jane's introduction of him. She received him with her very best politeness, which he returned with as much more, apologising for his intrusion, without any previous acquaintance with her, which he could not help flattering himself, however, might be justified by his relationship to the young ladies who introduced him to her notice. Mrs. Phillips was quite awed by such an excess of good breeding; but her contemplation of one stranger was soon put to an end by exclamations and inquiries about the other; of whom, however, she could only tell her nieces what they already knew, that Mr. Denny had brought him from London, and that he was to have a lieutenant's commission in the \97\97shire. She had been watching him the last hour, she said, as he walked up and down the street, and had Mr. Wickham appeared, Kitty and Lydia would certainly have continued the occupation, but unluckily no one passed windows now except a few of the officers, who, in comparison with the stranger, were become "stupid, disagreeable fellows." Some of them were to dine with the Phillipses the next day, and their aunt promised to make her husband call on Mr. Wickham, and give him an invitation also, if the family from Longbourn would come in the evening. This was agreed to, and Mrs. Phillips protested that they would have a nice comfortable noisy game of lottery tickets, and a little bit of hot supper afterwards. The prospect of such delights was very cheering, and they parted in mutual good spirits. Mr. Collins repeated his apologies in quitting the room, and was assured with unwearying civility that they were perfectly needless. 
As they walked home, Elizabeth related to Jane what she had seen pass between the two gentlemen; but though Jane would have defended either or both, had they appeared to be in the wrong, she could no more explain such behaviour than her sister. 
Mr. Collins on his return highly gratified Mrs. Bennet by admiring Mrs. Phillips's manners and politeness. He protested that, except Lady Catherine and her daughter, he had never seen a more elegant woman; for she had not only received him with the utmost civility, but even pointedly included him in her invitation for the next evening, although utterly unknown to her before. Something, he supposed, might be attributed to his connection with them, but yet he had never met with so much attention in the whole course of his life. 
Chapter 16
As no objection was made to the young people's engagement with their aunt, and all Mr. Collins's scruples of leaving Mr. and Mrs. Bennet for a single evening during his visit were most steadily resisted, the coach conveyed him and his five cousins at a suitable hour to Meryton; and the girls had the pleasure of hearing, as they entered the drawing-room, that Mr. Wickham had accepted their uncle's invitation, and was then in the house. 
When this information was given, and they had all taken their seats, Mr. Collins was at leisure to look around him and admire, and he was so much struck with the size and furniture of the apartment, that he declared he might almost have supposed himself in the small summer breakfast parlour at Rosings; a comparison that did not at first convey much gratification; but when Mrs. Phillips understood from him what Rosings was, and who was its proprietor\97when she had listened to the description of only one of Lady Catherine's drawing-rooms, and found that the chimney-piece alone had cost eight hundred pounds, she felt all the force of the compliment, and would hardly have resented a comparison with the housekeeper's room. 
In describing to her all the grandeur of Lady Catherine and her mansion, with occasional digressions in praise of his own humble abode, and the improvements it was receiving, he was happily employed until the gentlemen joined them; and he found in Mrs. Phillips a very attentive listener, whose opinion of his consequence increased with what she heard, and who was resolving to retail it all among her neighbours as soon as she could. To the girls, who could not listen to their cousin, and who had nothing to do but to wish for an instrument, and examine their own indifferent imitations of china on the mantelpiece, the interval of waiting appeared very long. It was over at last, however. The gentlemen did approach, and when Mr. Wickham walked into the room, Elizabeth felt that she had neither been seeing him before, nor thinking of him since, with the smallest degree of unreasonable admiration. The officers of the \97\97shire were in general a very creditable, gentlemanlike set, and the best of them were of the present party; but Mr. Wickham was as far beyond them all in person, countenance, air, and walk, as THEY were superior to the broad-faced, stuffy uncle Phillips, breathing port wine, who followed them into the room. 
Mr. Wickham was the happy man towards whom almost every female eye was turned, and Elizabeth was the happy woman by whom he finally seated himself; and the agreeable manner in which he immediately fell into conversation, though it was only on its being a wet night, made her feel that the commonest, dullest, most threadbare topic might be rendered interesting by the skill of the speaker. 
With such rivals for the notice of the fair as Mr. Wickham and the officers, Mr. Collins seemed to sink into insignificance; to the young ladies he certainly was nothing; but he had still at intervals a kind listener in Mrs. Phillips, and was by her watchfulness, most abundantly supplied with coffee and muffin. When the card-tables were placed, he had the opportunity of obliging her in turn, by sitting down to whist. 
"I know little of the game at present," said he, "but I shall be glad to improve myself, for in my situation in life\97" Mrs. Phillips was very glad for his compliance, but could not wait for his reason. 
Mr. Wickham did not play at whist, and with ready delight was he received at the other table between Elizabeth and Lydia. At first there seemed danger of Lydia's engrossing him entirely, for she was a most determined talker; but being likewise extremely fond of lottery tickets, she soon grew too much interested in the game, too eager in making bets and exclaiming after prizes to have attention for anyone in particular. Allowing for the common demands of the game, Mr. Wickham was therefore at leisure to talk to Elizabeth, and she was very willing to hear him, though what she chiefly wished to hear she could not hope to be told\97the history of his acquaintance with Mr. Darcy. She dared not even mention that gentleman. Her curiosity, however, was unexpectedly relieved. Mr. Wickham began the subject himself. He inquired how far Netherfield was from Meryton; and, after receiving her answer, asked in a hesitating manner how long Mr. Darcy had been staying there. 
"About a month," said Elizabeth; and then, unwilling to let the subject drop, added, "He is a man of very large property in Derbyshire, I understand." 
"Yes," replied Mr. Wickham; "his estate there is a noble one. A clear ten thousand per annum. You could not have met with a person more capable of giving you certain information on that head than myself, for I have been connected with his family in a particular manner from my infancy." 
Elizabeth could not but look surprised. 
"You may well be surprised, Miss Bennet, at such an assertion, after seeing, as you probably might, the very cold manner of our meeting yesterday. Are you much acquainted with Mr. Darcy?" 
"As much as I ever wish to be," cried Elizabeth very warmly. "I have spent four days in the same house with him, and I think him very disagreeable." 
"I have no right to give MY opinion," said Wickham, "as to his being agreeable or otherwise. I am not qualified to form one. I have known him too long and too well to be a fair judge. It is impossible for ME to be impartial. But I believe your opinion of him would in general astonish\97and perhaps you would not express it quite so strongly anywhere else. Here you are in your own family." 
"Upon my word, I say no more HERE than I might say in any house in the neighbourhood, except Netherfield. He is not at all liked in Hertfordshire. Everybody is disgusted with his pride. You will not find him more favourably spoken of by anyone." 
"I cannot pretend to be sorry," said Wickham, after a short interruption, "that he or that any man should not be estimated beyond their deserts; but with HIM I believe it does not often happen. The world is blinded by his fortune and consequence, or frightened by his high and imposing manners, and sees him only as he chooses to be seen." 
"I should take him, even on MY slight acquaintance, to be an ill-tempered man." Wickham only shook his head. 
"I wonder," said he, at the next opportunity of speaking, "whether he is likely to be in this country much longer." 
"I do not at all know; but I HEARD nothing of his going away when I was at Netherfield. I hope your plans in favour of the \97\97shire will not be affected by his being in the neighbourhood." 
"Oh! no\97it is not for ME to be driven away by Mr. Darcy. If HE wishes to avoid seeing ME, he must go. We are not on friendly terms, and it always gives me pain to meet him, but I have no reason for avoiding HIM but what I might proclaim before all the world, a sense of very great ill-usage, and most painful regrets at his being what he is. His father, Miss Bennet, the late Mr. Darcy, was one of the best men that ever breathed, and the truest friend I ever had; and I can never be in company with this Mr. Darcy without being grieved to the soul by a thousand tender recollections. His behaviour to myself has been scandalous; but I verily believe I could forgive him anything and everything, rather than his disappointing the hopes and disgracing the memory of his father." 
Elizabeth found the interest of the subject increase, and listened with all her heart; but the delicacy of it prevented further inquiry. 
Mr. Wickham began to speak on more general topics, Meryton, the neighbourhood, the society, appearing highly pleased with all that he had yet seen, and speaking of the latter with gentle but very intelligible gallantry. 
"It was the prospect of constant society, and good society," he added, "which was my chief inducement to enter the \97\97shire. I knew it to be a most respectable, agreeable corps, and my friend Denny tempted me further by his account of their present quarters, and the very great attentions and excellent acquaintances Meryton had procured them. Society, I own, is necessary to me. I have been a disappointed man, and my spirits will not bear solitude. I MUST have employment and society. A military life is not what I was intended for, but circumstances have now made it eligible. The church OUGHT to have been my profession\97I was brought up for the church, and I should at this time have been in possession of a most valuable living, had it pleased the gentleman we were speaking of just now." 
"Indeed!" 
"Yes\97the late Mr. Darcy bequeathed me the next presentation of the best living in his gift. He was my godfather, and excessively attached to me. I cannot do justice to his kindness. He meant to provide for me amply, and thought he had done it; but when the living fell, it was given elsewhere." 
"Good heavens!" cried Elizabeth; "but how could THAT be? How could his will be disregarded? Why did you not seek legal redress?" 
"There was just such an informality in the terms of the bequest as to give me no hope from law. A man of honour could not have doubted the intention, but Mr. Darcy chose to doubt it\97or to treat it as a merely conditional recommendation, and to assert that I had forfeited all claim to it by extravagance, imprudence\97in short anything or nothing. Certain it is, that the living became vacant two years ago, exactly as I was of an age to hold it, and that it was given to another man; and no less certain is it, that I cannot accuse myself of having really done anything to deserve to lose it. I have a warm, unguarded temper, and I may have spoken my opinion OF him, and TO him, too freely. I can recall nothing worse. But the fact is, that we are very different sort of men, and that he hates me." 
"This is quite shocking! He deserves to be publicly disgraced." 
"Some time or other he WILL be\97but it shall not be by ME. Till I can forget his father, I can never defy or expose HIM." 
Elizabeth honoured him for such feelings, and thought him handsomer than ever as he expressed them. 
"But what," said she, after a pause, "can have been his motive? What can have induced him to behave so cruelly?" 
"A thorough, determined dislike of me\97a dislike which I cannot but attribute in some measure to jealousy. Had the late Mr. Darcy liked me less, his son might have borne with me better; but his father's uncommon attachment to me irritated him, I believe, very early in life. He had not a temper to bear the sort of competition in which we stood\97the sort of preference which was often given me." 
"I had not thought Mr. Darcy so bad as this\97though I have never liked him. I had not thought so very ill of him. I had supposed him to be despising his fellow-creatures in general, but did not suspect him of descending to such malicious revenge, such injustice, such inhumanity as this." 
After a few minutes' reflection, however, she continued, "I DO remember his boasting one day, at Netherfield, of the implacability of his resentments, of his having an unforgiving temper. His disposition must be dreadful." 
"I will not trust myself on the subject," replied Wickham; "I can hardly be just to him." 
Elizabeth was again deep in thought, and after a time exclaimed, "To treat in such a manner the godson, the friend, the favourite of his father!" She could have added, "A young man, too, like YOU, whose very countenance may vouch for your being amiable"\97but she contented herself with, "and one, too, who had probably been his companion from childhood, connected together, as I think you said, in the closest manner!" 
"We were born in the same parish, within the same park; the greatest part of our youth was passed together; inmates of the same house, sharing the same amusements, objects of the same parental care. MY father began life in the profession which your uncle, Mr. Phillips, appears to do so much credit to\97but he gave up everything to be of use to the late Mr. Darcy and devoted all his time to the care of the Pemberley property. He was most highly esteemed by Mr. Darcy, a most intimate, confidential friend. Mr. Darcy often acknowledged himself to be under the greatest obligations to my father's active superintendence, and when, immediately before my father's death, Mr. Darcy gave him a voluntary promise of providing for me, I am convinced that he felt it to be as much a debt of gratitude to HIM, as of his affection to myself." 
"How strange!" cried Elizabeth. "How abominable! I wonder that the very pride of this Mr. Darcy has not made him just to you! If from no better motive, that he should not have been too proud to be dishonest\97for dishonesty I must call it." 
"It IS wonderful," replied Wickham, "for almost all his actions may be traced to pride; and pride had often been his best friend. It has connected him nearer with virtue than with any other feeling. But we are none of us consistent, and in his behaviour to me there were stronger impulses even than pride." 
"Can such abominable pride as his have ever done him good?" 
"Yes. It has often led him to be liberal and generous, to give his money freely, to display hospitality, to assist his tenants, and relieve the poor. Family pride, and FILIAL pride\97for he is very proud of what his father was\97have done this. Not to appear to disgrace his family, to degenerate from the popular qualities, or lose the influence of the Pemberley House, is a powerful motive. He has also BROTHERLY pride, which, with SOME brotherly affection, makes him a very kind and careful guardian of his sister, and you will hear him generally cried up as the most attentive and best of brothers." 
"What sort of girl is Miss Darcy?" 
He shook his head. "I wish I could call her amiable. It gives me pain to speak ill of a Darcy. But she is too much like her brother\97very, very proud. As a child, she was affectionate and pleasing, and extremely fond of me; and I have devoted hours and hours to her amusement. But she is nothing to me now. She is a handsome girl, about fifteen or sixteen, and, I understand, highly accomplished. Since her father's death, her home has been London, where a lady lives with her, and superintends her education." 
After many pauses and many trials of other subjects, Elizabeth could not help reverting once more to the first, and saying: 
"I am astonished at his intimacy with Mr. Bingley! How can Mr. Bingley, who seems good humour itself, and is, I really believe, truly amiable, be in friendship with such a man? How can they suit each other? Do you know Mr. Bingley?" 
"Not at all." 
"He is a sweet-tempered, amiable, charming man. He cannot know what Mr. Darcy is." 
"Probably not; but Mr. Darcy can please where he chooses. He does not want abilities. He can be a conversible companion if he thinks it worth his while. Among those who are at all his equals in consequence, he is a very different man from what he is to the less prosperous. His pride never deserts him; but with the rich he is liberal-minded, just, sincere, rational, honourable, and perhaps agreeable\97allowing something for fortune and figure." 
The whist party soon afterwards breaking up, the players gathered round the other table and Mr. Collins took his station between his cousin Elizabeth and Mrs. Phillips. The usual inquiries as to his success was made by the latter. It had not been very great; he had lost every point; but when Mrs. Phillips began to express her concern thereupon, he assured her with much earnest gravity that it was not of the least importance, that he considered the money as a mere trifle, and begged that she would not make herself uneasy. 
"I know very well, madam," said he, "that when persons sit down to a card-table, they must take their chances of these things, and happily I am not in such circumstances as to make five shillings any object. There are undoubtedly many who could not say the same, but thanks to Lady Catherine de Bourgh, I am removed far beyond the necessity of regarding little matters." 
Mr. Wickham's attention was caught; and after observing Mr. Collins for a few moments, he asked Elizabeth in a low voice whether her relation was very intimately acquainted with the family of de Bourgh. 
"Lady Catherine de Bourgh," she replied, "has very lately given him a living. I hardly know how Mr. Collins was first introduced to her notice, but he certainly has not known her long." 
"You know of course that Lady Catherine de Bourgh and Lady Anne Darcy were sisters; consequently that she is aunt to the present Mr. Darcy." 
"No, indeed, I did not. I knew nothing at all of Lady Catherine's connections. I never heard of her existence till the day before yesterday." 
"Her daughter, Miss de Bourgh, will have a very large fortune, and it is believed that she and her cousin will unite the two estates." 
This information made Elizabeth smile, as she thought of poor Miss Bingley. Vain indeed must be all her attentions, vain and useless her affection for his sister and her praise of himself, if he were already self-destined for another. 
"Mr. Collins," said she, "speaks highly both of Lady Catherine and her daughter; but from some particulars that he has related of her ladyship, I suspect his gratitude misleads him, and that in spite of her being his patroness, she is an arrogant, conceited woman." 
"I believe her to be both in a great degree," replied Wickham; "I have not seen her for many years, but I very well remember that I never liked her, and that her manners were dictatorial and insolent. She has the reputation of being remarkably sensible and clever; but I rather believe she derives part of her abilities from her rank and fortune, part from her authoritative manner, and the rest from the pride for her nephew, who chooses that everyone connected with him should have an understanding of the first class." 
Elizabeth allowed that he had given a very rational account of it, and they continued talking together, with mutual satisfaction till supper put an end to cards, and gave the rest of the ladies their share of Mr. Wickham's attentions. There could be no conversation in the noise of Mrs. Phillips's supper party, but his manners recommended him to everybody. Whatever he said, was said well; and whatever he did, done gracefully. Elizabeth went away with her head full of him. She could think of nothing but of Mr. Wickham, and of what he had told her, all the way home; but there was not time for her even to mention his name as they went, for neither Lydia nor Mr. Collins were once silent. Lydia talked incessantly of lottery tickets, of the fish she had lost and the fish she had won; and Mr. Collins in describing the civility of Mr. and Mrs. Phillips, protesting that he did not in the least regard his losses at whist, enumerating all the dishes at supper, and repeatedly fearing that he crowded his cousins, had more to say than he could well manage before the carriage stopped at Longbourn House. 
Chapter 17
Elizabeth related to Jane the next day what had passed between Mr. Wickham and herself. Jane listened with astonishment and concern; she knew not how to believe that Mr. Darcy could be so unworthy of Mr. Bingley's regard; and yet, it was not in her nature to question the veracity of a young man of such amiable appearance as Wickham. The possibility of his having endured such unkindness, was enough to interest all her tender feelings; and nothing remained therefore to be done, but to think well of them both, to defend the conduct of each, and throw into the account of accident or mistake whatever could not be otherwise explained. 
"They have both," said she, "been deceived, I dare say, in some way or other, of which we can form no idea. Interested people have perhaps misrepresented each to the other. It is, in short, impossible for us to conjecture the causes or circumstances which may have alienated them, without actual blame on either side." 
"Very true, indeed; and now, my dear Jane, what have you got to say on behalf of the interested people who have probably been concerned in the business? Do clear THEM too, or we shall be obliged to think ill of somebody." 
"Laugh as much as you choose, but you will not laugh me out of my opinion. My dearest Lizzy, do but consider in what a disgraceful light it places Mr. Darcy, to be treating his father's favourite in such a manner, one whom his father had promised to provide for. It is impossible. No man of common humanity, no man who had any value for his character, could be capable of it. Can his most intimate friends be so excessively deceived in him? Oh! no." 
"I can much more easily believe Mr. Bingley's being imposed on, than that Mr. Wickham should invent such a history of himself as he gave me last night; names, facts, everything mentioned without ceremony. If it be not so, let Mr. Darcy contradict it. Besides, there was truth in his looks." 
"It is difficult indeed\97it is distressing. One does not know what to think." 
"I beg your pardon; one knows exactly what to think." 
But Jane could think with certainty on only one point\97that Mr. Bingley, if he HAD been imposed on, would have much to suffer when the affair became public. 
The two young ladies were summoned from the shrubbery, where this conversation passed, by the arrival of the very persons of whom they had been speaking; Mr. Bingley and his sisters came to give their personal invitation for the long-expected ball at Netherfield, which was fixed for the following Tuesday. The two ladies were delighted to see their dear friend again, called it an age since they had met, and repeatedly asked what she had been doing with herself since their separation. To the rest of the family they paid little attention; avoiding Mrs. Bennet as much as possible, saying not much to Elizabeth, and nothing at all to the others. They were soon gone again, rising from their seats with an activity which took their brother by surprise, and hurrying off as if eager to escape from Mrs. Bennet's civilities. 
The prospect of the Netherfield ball was extremely agreeable to every female of the family. Mrs. Bennet chose to consider it as given in compliment to her eldest daughter, and was particularly flattered by receiving the invitation from Mr. Bingley himself, instead of a ceremonious card. Jane pictured to herself a happy evening in the society of her two friends, and the attentions of her brother; and Elizabeth thought with pleasure of dancing a great deal with Mr. Wickham, and of seeing a confirmation of everything in Mr. Darcy's look and behavior. The happiness anticipated by Catherine and Lydia depended less on any single event, or any particular person, for though they each, like Elizabeth, meant to dance half the evening with Mr. Wickham, he was by no means the only partner who could satisfy them, and a ball was, at any rate, a ball. And even Mary could assure her family that she had no disinclination for it. 
"While I can have my mornings to myself," said she, "it is enough\97I think it is no sacrifice to join occasionally in evening engagements. Society has claims on us all; and I profess myself one of those who consider intervals of recreation and amusement as desirable for everybody." 
Elizabeth's spirits were so high on this occasion, that though she did not often speak unnecessarily to Mr. Collins, she could not help asking him whether he intended to accept Mr. Bingley's invitation, and if he did, whether he would think it proper to join in the evening's amusement; and she was rather surprised to find that he entertained no scruple whatever on that head, and was very far from dreading a rebuke either from the Archbishop, or Lady Catherine de Bourgh, by venturing to dance. 
"I am by no means of the opinion, I assure you," said he, "that a ball of this kind, given by a young man of character, to respectable people, can have any evil tendency; and I am so far from objecting to dancing myself, that I shall hope to be honoured with the hands of all my fair cousins in the course of the evening; and I take this opportunity of soliciting yours, Miss Elizabeth, for the two first dances especially, a preference which I trust my cousin Jane will attribute to the right cause, and not to any disrespect for her." 
Elizabeth felt herself completely taken in. She had fully proposed being engaged by Mr. Wickham for those very dances; and to have Mr. Collins instead! her liveliness had never been worse timed. There was no help for it, however. Mr. Wickham's happiness and her own were perforce delayed a little longer, and Mr. Collins' proposal accepted with as good a grace as she could. She was not the better pleased with his gallantry from the idea it suggested of something more. It now first struck her, that SHE was selected from among her sisters as worthy of being mistress of Hunsford Parsonage, and of assisting to form a quadrille table at Rosings, in the absence of more eligible visitors. The idea soon reached to conviction, as she observed his increasing civilities toward herself, and heard his frequent attempt at a compliment on her wit and vivacity; and though more astonished than gratified herself by this effect of her charms, it was not long before her mother gave her to understand that the probability of their marriage was extremely agreeable to HER. Elizabeth, however, did not choose to take the hint, being well aware that a serious dispute must be the consequence of any reply. Mr. Collins might never make the offer, and till he did, it was useless to quarrel about him. 
If there had not been a Netherfield ball to prepare for and talk of, the younger Miss Bennets would have been in a very pitiable state at this time, for from the day of the invitation, to the day of the ball, there was such a succession of rain as prevented their walking to Meryton once. No aunt, no officers, no news could be sought after\97the very shoe-roses for Netherfield were got by proxy. Even Elizabeth might have found some trial of her patience in weather which totally suspended the improvement of her acquaintance with Mr. Wickham; and nothing less than a dance on Tuesday, could have made such a Friday, Saturday, Sunday, and Monday endurable to Kitty and Lydia. 
Chapter 18
Till Elizabeth entered the drawing-room at Netherfield, and looked in vain for Mr. Wickham among the cluster of red coats there assembled, a doubt of his being present had never occurred to her. The certainty of meeting him had not been checked by any of those recollections that might not unreasonably have alarmed her. She had dressed with more than usual care, and prepared in the highest spirits for the conquest of all that remained unsubdued of his heart, trusting that it was not more than might be won in the course of the evening. But in an instant arose the dreadful suspicion of his being purposely omitted for Mr. Darcy's pleasure in the Bingleys' invitation to the officers; and though this was not exactly the case, the absolute fact of his absence was pronounced by his friend Denny, to whom Lydia eagerly applied, and who told them that Wickham had been obliged to go to town on business the day before, and was not yet returned; adding, with a significant smile, "I do not imagine his business would have called him away just now, if he had not wanted to avoid a certain gentleman here." 
This part of his intelligence, though unheard by Lydia, was caught by Elizabeth, and, as it assured her that Darcy was not less answerable for Wickham's absence than if her first surmise had been just, every feeling of displeasure against the former was so sharpened by immediate disappointment, that she could hardly reply with tolerable civility to the polite inquiries which he directly afterwards approached to make. Attendance, forbearance, patience with Darcy, was injury to Wickham. She was resolved against any sort of conversation with him, and turned away with a degree of ill-humour which she could not wholly surmount even in speaking to Mr. Bingley, whose blind partiality provoked her. 
But Elizabeth was not formed for ill-humour; and though every prospect of her own was destroyed for the evening, it could not dwell long on her spirits; and having told all her griefs to Charlotte Lucas, whom she had not seen for a week, she was soon able to make a voluntary transition to the oddities of her cousin, and to point him out to her particular notice. The first two dances, however, brought a return of distress; they were dances of mortification. Mr. Collins, awkward and solemn, apologising instead of attending, and often moving wrong without being aware of it, gave her all the shame and misery which a disagreeable partner for a couple of dances can give. The moment of her release from him was ecstasy. 
She danced next with an officer, and had the refreshment of talking of Wickham, and of hearing that he was universally liked. When those dances were over, she returned to Charlotte Lucas, and was in conversation with her, when she found herself suddenly addressed by Mr. Darcy who took her so much by surprise in his application for her hand, that, without knowing what she did, she accepted him. He walked away again immediately, and she was left to fret over her own want of presence of mind; Charlotte tried to console her: 
"I dare say you will find him very agreeable." 
"Heaven forbid! THAT would be the greatest misfortune of all! To find a man agreeable whom on is determined to hate! Do not wish me such an evil." 
When the dancing recommenced, however, and Darcy approached to claim her hand, Charlotte could not help cautioning her in a whisper, not to be a simpleton, and allow her fancy for Wickham to make her appear unpleasant in the eyes of a man ten times his consequence. Elizabeth made no answer, and took her place in the set, amazed at the dignity to which she was arrived in being allowed to stand opposite to Mr. Darcy, and reading in her neighbours' looks, their equal amazement in beholding it. They stood for some time without speaking a word; and she began to imagine that their silence was to last through the two dances, and at first was resolved not to break it; till suddenly fancying that it would be the greater punishment to her partner to oblige him to talk, she made some slight observation on the dance. He replied, and was again silent. After a pause of some minutes, she addressed him a second time with:\97"It is YOUR turn to say something now, Mr. Darcy. I talked about the dance, and YOU ought to make some sort of remark on the size of the room, or the number of couples." 
He smiled, and assured her that whatever she wished him to say should be said. 
"Very well. That reply will do for the present. Perhaps by and by I may observe that private balls are much pleasanter than public ones. But NOW we may be silent." 
"Do you talk by rule, then, while you are dancing?" 
"Sometimes. One must speak a little, you know. It would look odd to be entirely silent for half an hour together; and yet for the advantage of SOME, conversation ought to be so arranged, as that they may have the trouble of saying as little as possible." 
"Are you consulting your own feelings in the present case, or do you imagine that you are gratifying mine?" 
"Both," replied Elizabeth archly; "for I have always seen a great similarity in the turn of our minds. We are each of an unsocial, taciturn disposition, unwilling to speak, unless we expect to say something that will amaze the whole room, and be handed down to posterity with all the eclat of a proverb." 
"This is no very striking resemblance of your own character, I am sure," said he. "How near it may be to MINE, I cannot pretend to say. YOU think it a faithful portrait undoubtedly." 
"I must not decide on my own performance." 
He made no answer, and they were again silent till they had gone down the dance, when he asked her if she and her sisters did not very often walk to Meryton. She answered in the affirmative, and, unable to resist the temptation, added, "When you met us there the other day, we had just been forming a new acquaintance." 
The effect was immediate. A deeper shade of hauteur overspread his features, but he said not a word, and Elizabeth, though blaming herself for her own weakness, could not go on. At length Darcy spoke, and in a constrained manner said, "Mr. Wickham is blessed with such happy manners as may ensure his MAKING friends\97whether he may be equally capable of RETAINING them, is less certain." 
"He has been so unlucky as to lose YOUR friendship," replied Elizabeth with emphasis, "and in a manner which he is likely to suffer from all his life." 
Darcy made no answer, and seemed desirous of changing the subject. At that moment, Sir William Lucas appeared close to them, meaning to pass through the set to the other side of the room; but on perceiving Mr. Darcy, he stopped with a bow of superior courtesy to compliment him on his dancing and his partner. 
"I have been most highly gratified indeed, my dear sir. Such very superior dancing is not often seen. It is evident that you belong to the first circles. Allow me to say, however, that your fair partner does not disgrace you, and that I must hope to have this pleasure often repeated, especially when a certain desirable event, my dear Eliza (glancing at her sister and Bingley) shall take place. What congratulations will then flow in! I appeal to Mr. Darcy:\97but let me not interrupt you, sir. You will not thank me for detaining you from the bewitching converse of that young lady, whose bright eyes are also upbraiding me." 
The latter part of this address was scarcely heard by Darcy; but Sir William's allusion to his friend seemed to strike him forcibly, and his eyes were directed with a very serious expression towards Bingley and Jane, who were dancing together. Recovering himself, however, shortly, he turned to his partner, and said, "Sir William's interruption has made me forget what we were talking of." 
"I do not think we were speaking at all. Sir William could not have interrupted two people in the room who had less to say for themselves. We have tried two or three subjects already without success, and what we are to talk of next I cannot imagine." 
"What think you of books?" said he, smiling. 
"Books\97oh! no. I am sure we never read the same, or not with the same feelings." 
"I am sorry you think so; but if that be the case, there can at least be no want of subject. We may compare our different opinions." 
"No\97I cannot talk of books in a ball-room; my head is always full of something else." 
"The PRESENT always occupies you in such scenes\97does it?" said he, with a look of doubt. 
"Yes, always," she replied, without knowing what she said, for her thoughts had wandered far from the subject, as soon afterwards appeared by her suddenly exclaiming, "I remember hearing you once say, Mr. Darcy, that you hardly ever forgave, that you resentment once created was unappeasable. You are very cautious, I suppose, as to its BEING CREATED." 
"I am," said he, with a firm voice. 
"And never allow yourself to be blinded by prejudice?" 
"I hope not." 
"It is particularly incumbent on those who never change their opinion, to be secure of judging properly at first. 
"May I ask to what these questions tend?" 
"Merely to the illustration of YOUR character," said she, endeavouring to shake off her gravity. "I am trying to make it out." 
"And what is your success?" 
She shook her head. "I do not get on at all. I hear such different accounts of you as puzzle me exceedingly." 
"I can readily believe," answered he gravely, "that reports may vary greatly with respect to me; and I could wish, Miss Bennet, that you were not to sketch my character at the present moment, as there is reason to fear that the performance would reflect no credit on either." 
"But if I do not take your likeness now, I may never have another opportunity." 
"I would by no means suspend any pleasure of yours," he coldly replied. She said no more, and they went down the other dance and parted in silence; and on each side dissatisfied, though not to an equal degree, for in Darcy's breast there was a tolerable powerful feeling towards her, which soon procured her pardon, and directed all his anger against another. 
They had not long separated, when Miss Bingley came towards her, and with an expression of civil disdain accosted her: 
"So, Miss Eliza, I hear you are quite delighted with George Wickham! Your sister has been talking to me about him, and asking me a thousand questions; and I find that the young man quite forgot to tell you, among his other communication, that he was the son of old Wickham, the late Mr. Darcy's steward. Let me recommend you, however, as a friend, not to give implicit confidence to all his assertions; for as to Mr. Darcy's using him ill, it is perfectly false; for, on the contrary, he has always been remarkably kind to him, though George Wickham has treated Mr. Darcy in a most infamous manner. I do not know the particulars, but I know very well that Mr. Darcy is not in the least to blame, that he cannot bear to hear George Wickham mentioned, and that though my brother thought that he could not well avoid including him in his invitation to the officers, he was excessively glad to find that he had taken himself out of the way. His coming into the country at all is a most insolent thing, indeed, and I wonder how he could presume to do it. I pity you, Miss Eliza, for this discovery of your favourite's guilt; but really, considering his descent, one could not expect much better." 
"His guilt and his descent appear by your account to be the same," said Elizabeth angrily; "for I have heard you accuse him of nothing worse than of being the son of Mr. Darcy's steward, and of THAT, I can assure you, he informed me himself." 
"I beg your pardon," replied Miss Bingley, turning away with a sneer. "Excuse my interference\97it was kindly meant." 
"Insolent girl!" said Elizabeth to herself. "You are much mistaken if you expect to influence me by such a paltry attack as this. I see nothing in it but your own wilful ignorance and the malice of Mr. Darcy." She then sought her eldest sister, who has undertaken to make inquiries on the same subject of Bingley. Jane met her with a smile of such sweet complacency, a glow of such happy expression, as sufficiently marked how well she was satisfied with the occurrences of the evening. Elizabeth instantly read her feelings, and at that moment solicitude for Wickham, resentment against his enemies, and everything else, gave way before the hope of Jane's being in the fairest way for happiness. 
"I want to know," said she, with a countenance no less smiling than her sister's, "what you have learnt about Mr. Wickham. But perhaps you have been too pleasantly engaged to think of any third person; in which case you may be sure of my pardon." 
"No," replied Jane, "I have not forgotten him; but I have nothing satisfactory to tell you. Mr. Bingley does not know the whole of his history, and is quite ignorant of the circumstances which have principally offended Mr. Darcy; but he will vouch for the good conduct, the probity, and honour of his friend, and is perfectly convinced that Mr. Wickham has deserved much less attention from Mr. Darcy than he has received; and I am sorry to say by his account as well as his sister's, Mr. Wickham is by no means a respectable young man. I am afraid he has been very imprudent, and has deserved to lose Mr. Darcy's regard." 
"Mr. Bingley does not know Mr. Wickham himself?" 
"No; he never saw him till the other morning at Meryton." 
"This account then is what he has received from Mr. Darcy. I am satisfied. But what does he say of the living?" 
"He does not exactly recollect the circumstances, though he has heard them from Mr. Darcy more than once, but he believes that it was left to him CONDITIONALLY only." 
"I have not a doubt of Mr. Bingley's sincerity," said Elizabeth warmly; "but you must excuse my not being convinced by assurances only. Mr. Bingley's defense of his friend was a very able one, I dare say; but since he is unacquainted with several parts of the story, and has learnt the rest from that friend himself, I shall venture to still think of both gentlemen as I did before." 
She then changed the discourse to one more gratifying to each, and on which there could be no difference of sentiment. Elizabeth listened with delight to the happy, though modest hopes which Jane entertained of Mr. Bingley's regard, and said all in her power to heighten her confidence in it. On their being joined by Mr. Bingley himself, Elizabeth withdrew to Miss Lucas; to whose inquiry after the pleasantness of her last partner she had scarcely replied, before Mr. Collins came up to them, and told her with great exultation that he had just been so fortunate as to make a most important discovery. 
"I have found out," said he, "by a singular accident, that there is now in the room a near relation of my patroness. I happened to overhear the gentleman himself mentioning to the young lady who does the honours of the house the names of his cousin Miss de Bourgh, and of her mother Lady Catherine. How wonderfully these sort of things occur! Who would have thought of my meeting with, perhaps, a nephew of Lady Catherine de Bourgh in this assembly! I am most thankful that the discovery is made in time for me to pay my respects to him, which I am now going to do, and trust he will excuse my not having done it before. My total ignorance of the connection must plead my apology." 
"You are not going to introduce yourself to Mr. Darcy!" 
"Indeed I am. I shall entreat his pardon for not having done it earlier. I believe him to be Lady Catherine's NEPHEW. It will be in my power to assure him that her ladyship was quite well yesterday se'nnight." 
Elizabeth tried hard to dissuade him from such a scheme, assuring him that Mr. Darcy would consider his addressing him without introduction as an impertinent freedom, rather than a compliment to his aunt; that it was not in the least necessary there should be any notice on either side; and that if it were, it must belong to Mr. Darcy, the superior in consequence, to begin the acquaintance. Mr. Collins listened to her with the determined air of following his own inclination, and, when she ceased speaking, replied thus: 
"My dear Miss Elizabeth, I have the highest opinion in the world in your excellent judgement in all matters within the scope of your understanding; but permit me to say, that there must be a wide difference between the established forms of ceremony amongst the laity, and those which regulate the clergy; for, give me leave to observe that I consider the clerical office as equal in point of dignity with the highest rank in the kingdom\97provided that a proper humility of behaviour is at the same time maintained. You must therefore allow me to follow the dictates of my conscience on this occasion, which leads me to perform what I look on as a point of duty. Pardon me for neglecting to profit by your advice, which on every other subject shall be my constant guide, though in the case before us I consider myself more fitted by education and habitual study to decide on what is right than a young lady like yourself." And with a low bow he left her to attack Mr. Darcy, whose reception of his advances she eagerly watched, and whose astonishment at being so addressed was very evident. Her cousin prefaced his speech with a solemn bow and though she could not hear a word of it, she felt as if hearing it all, and saw in the motion of his lips the words "apology," "Hunsford," and "Lady Catherine de Bourgh." It vexed her to see him expose himself to such a man. Mr. Darcy was eyeing him with unrestrained wonder, and when at last Mr. Collins allowed him time to speak, replied with an air of distant civility. Mr. Collins, however, was not discouraged from speaking again, and Mr. Darcy's contempt seemed abundantly increasing with the length of his second speech, and at the end of it he only made him a slight bow, and moved another way. Mr. Collins then returned to Elizabeth. 
"I have no reason, I assure you," said he, "to be dissatisfied with my reception. Mr. Darcy seemed much pleased with the attention. He answered me with the utmost civility, and even paid me the compliment of saying that he was so well convinced of Lady Catherine's discernment as to be certain she could never bestow a favour unworthily. It was really a very handsome thought. Upon the whole, I am much pleased with him." 
As Elizabeth had no longer any interest of her own to pursue, she turned her attention almost entirely on her sister and Mr. Bingley; and the train of agreeable reflections which her observations gave birth to, made her perhaps almost as happy as Jane. She saw her in idea settled in that very house, in all the felicity which a marriage of true affection could bestow; and she felt capable, under such circumstances, of endeavouring even to like Bingley's two sisters. Her mother's thoughts she plainly saw were bent the same way, and she determined not to venture near her, lest she might hear too much. When they sat down to supper, therefore, she considered it a most unlucky perverseness which placed them within one of each other; and deeply was she vexed to find that her mother was talking to that one person (Lady Lucas) freely, openly, and of nothing else but her expectation that Jane would soon be married to Mr. Bingley. It was an animating subject, and Mrs. Bennet seemed incapable of fatigue while enumerating the advantages of the match. His being such a charming young man, and so rich, and living but three miles from them, were the first points of self-gratulation; and then it was such a comfort to think how fond the two sisters were of Jane, and to be certain that they must desire the connection as much as she could do. It was, moreover, such a promising thing for her younger daughters, as Jane's marrying so greatly must throw them in the way of other rich men; and lastly, it was so pleasant at her time of life to be able to consign her single daughters to the care of their sister, that she might not be obliged to go into company more than she liked. It was necessary to make this circumstance a matter of pleasure, because on such occasions it is the etiquette; but no one was less likely than Mrs. Bennet to find comfort in staying home at any period of her life. She concluded with many good wishes that Lady Lucas might soon be equally fortunate, though evidently and triumphantly believing there was no chance of it. 
In vain did Elizabeth endeavour to check the rapidity of her mother's words, or persuade her to describe her felicity in a less audible whisper; for, to her inexpressible vexation, she could perceive that the chief of it was overheard by Mr. Darcy, who sat opposite to them. Her mother only scolded her for being nonsensical. 
"What is Mr. Darcy to me, pray, that I should be afraid of him? I am sure we owe him no such particular civility as to be obliged to say nothing HE may not like to hear." 
"For heaven's sake, madam, speak lower. What advantage can it be for you to offend Mr. Darcy? You will never recommend yourself to his friend by so doing!" 
Nothing that she could say, however, had any influence. Her mother would talk of her views in the same intelligible tone. Elizabeth blushed and blushed again with shame and vexation. She could not help frequently glancing her eye at Mr. Darcy, though every glance convinced her of what she dreaded; for though he was not always looking at her mother, she was convinced that his attention was invariably fixed by her. The expression of his face changed gradually from indignant contempt to a composed and steady gravity. 
At length, however, Mrs. Bennet had no more to say; and Lady Lucas, who had been long yawning at the repetition of delights which she saw no likelihood of sharing, was left to the comforts of cold ham and chicken. Elizabeth now began to revive. But not long was the interval of tranquillity; for, when supper was over, singing was talked of, and she had the mortification of seeing Mary, after very little entreaty, preparing to oblige the company. By many significant looks and silent entreaties, did she endeavour to prevent such a proof of complaisance, but in vain; Mary would not understand them; such an opportunity of exhibiting was delightful to her, and she began her song. Elizabeth's eyes were fixed on her with most painful sensations, and she watched her progress through the several stanzas with an impatience which was very ill rewarded at their close; for Mary, on receiving, amongst the thanks of the table, the hint of a hope that she might be prevailed on to favour them again, after the pause of half a minute began another. Mary's powers were by no means fitted for such a display; her voice was weak, and her manner affected. Elizabeth was in agonies. She looked at Jane, to see how she bore it; but Jane was very composedly talking to Bingley. She looked at his two sisters, and saw them making signs of derision at each other, and at Darcy, who continued, however, imperturbably grave. She looked at her father to entreat his interference, lest Mary should be singing all night. He took the hint, and when Mary had finished her second song, said aloud, "That will do extremely well, child. You have delighted us long enough. Let the other young ladies have time to exhibit." 
Mary, though pretending not to hear, was somewhat disconcerted; and Elizabeth, sorry for her, and sorry for her father's speech, was afraid her anxiety had done no good. Others of the party were now applied to. 
"If I," said Mr. Collins, "were so fortunate as to be able to sing, I should have great pleasure, I am sure, in obliging the company with an air; for I consider music as a very innocent diversion, and perfectly compatible with the profession of a clergyman. I do not mean, however, to assert that we can be justified in devoting too much of our time to music, for there are certainly other things to be attended to. The rector of a parish has much to do. In the first place, he must make such an agreement for tithes as a may be beneficial to himself and not offensive to his patron. He must write his own sermons; and the time that remains will not be too much for his parish duties, and the care and improvement of his dwelling, which he cannot be excused from making as a comfortable as possible. And I do not think it of light importance that he should have attentive and conciliatory manner towards everybody, especially towards those to whom he owes his preferment. I cannot acquit him of that duty; nor could I think well of the man who should omit an occasion of testifying his respect towards anybody connected with the family." And with a bow to Mr. Darcy, he concluded his speech, which had been spoken so loud as a to be heard by half the room. Many stared\97many smiled; but no one looked more amused than Mr. Bennet himself, while his wife seriously commended Mr. Collins for having spoken so sensibly, and observed in a half-whisper to Lady Lucas, that he was a remarkably clever, good kind of young man. 
To Elizabeth it appeared that, had her family made an agreement to expose themselves as a much as a they could during the evening, it would have been impossible for them to play their parts with more spirit or finer success; and happy did she think it for Bingley and her sister that some of the exhibition had escaped his notice, and that his feelings were not of a sort to be much distressed by the folly which he must have witnessed. That his two sisters and Mr. Darcy, however, should have such an opportunity of ridiculing her relations, was bad enough, and she could not determine whether the silent contempt of the gentleman, or the insolent smiles of the ladies, were more intolerable. 
The rest of the evening brought her little amusement. She was teased by Mr. Collins, who continued most perseveringly by her side, and though he could not prevail on her to dance with him again, put it out of her power to dance with others. In vain did she entreat him to stand up with somebody else, and offer to introduce him to any young lady in the room. He assured her, that as to dancing, he was perfectly indifferent to it; that his chief object was by delicate attentions to recommend himself to her and that he should therefore make a point of remaining close to her the whole evening. There was no arguing upon such a project. She owed her greatest relief to her friend Miss Lucas, who often joined them, and good-naturedly engaged Mr. Collins's conversation to herself. 
She was at least free from the offense of Mr. Darcy's further notice; though often standing within a very short distance of her, quite disengaged, he never came near enough to speak. She felt it to be the probable consequence of her allusions to Mr. Wickham, and rejoiced in it. 
The Longbourn party were the last of all the company to depart, and, by a manoeuvre of Mrs. Bennet, had to wait for their carriage a quarter of an hour after everybody else was gone, which gave them time to see how heartily they were wished away by some of the family. Mrs. Hurst and her sister scarcely opened their mouths, except to complain of fatigue, and were evidently impatient to have the house to themselves. They repulsed every attempt of Mrs. Bennet at conversation, and by so doing threw a languor over the whole party, which was very little relieved by the long speeches of Mr. Collins, who was complimenting Mr. Bingley and his sisters on the elegance of their entertainment, and the hospitality and politeness which had marked their behaviour to their guests. Darcy said nothing at all. Mr. Bennet, in equal silence, was enjoying the scene. Mr. Bingley and Jane were standing together, a little detached from the rest, and talked only to each other. Elizabeth preserved as steady a silence as either Mrs. Hurst or Miss Bingley; and even Lydia was too much fatigued to utter more than the occasional exclamation of "Lord, how tired I am!" accompanied by a violent yawn. 
When at length they arose to take leave, Mrs. Bennet was most pressingly civil in her hope of seeing the whole family soon at Longbourn, and addressed herself especially to Mr. Bingley, to assure him how happy he would make them by eating a family dinner with them at any time, without the ceremony of a formal invitation. Bingley was all grateful pleasure, and he readily engaged for taking the earliest opportunity of waiting on her, after his return from London, whither he was obliged to go the next day for a short time. 
Mrs. Bennet was perfectly satisfied, and quitted the house under the delightful persuasion that, allowing for the necessary preparations of settlements, new carriages, and wedding clothes, she should undoubtedly see her daughter settled at Netherfield in the course of three or four months. Of having another daughter married to Mr. Collins, she thought with equal certainty, and with considerable, though not equal, pleasure. Elizabeth was the least dear to her of all her children; and though the man and the match were quite good enough for HER, the worth of each was eclipsed by Mr. Bingley and Netherfield. 
Chapter 19
The next day opened a new scene at Longbourn. Mr. Collins made his declaration in form. Having resolved to do it without loss of time, as his leave of absence extended only to the following Saturday, and having no feelings of diffidence to make it distressing to himself even at the moment, he set about it in a very orderly manner, with all the observances, which he supposed a regular part of the business. On finding Mrs. Bennet, Elizabeth, and one of the younger girls together, soon after breakfast, he addressed the mother in these words: 
"May I hope, madam, for your interest with your fair daughter Elizabeth, when I solicit for the honour of a private audience with her in the course of this morning?" 
Before Elizabeth had time for anything but a blush of surprise, Mrs. Bennet answered instantly, "Oh dear!\97yes\97certainly. I am sure Lizzy will be very happy\97I am sure she can have no objection. Come, Kitty, I want you upstairs." And, gathering her work together, she was hastening away, when Elizabeth called out: 
"Dear madam, do not go. I beg you will not go. Mr. Collins must excuse me. He can have nothing to say to me that anybody need not hear. I am going away myself." 
"No, no, nonsense, Lizzy. I desire you to stay where you are." And upon Elizabeth's seeming really, with vexed and embarrassed looks, about to escape, she added: "Lizzy, I INSIST upon your staying and hearing Mr. Collins." 
Elizabeth would not oppose such an injunction\97and a moment's consideration making her also sensible that it would be wisest to get it over as soon and as quietly as possible, she sat down again and tried to conceal, by incessant employment the feelings which were divided between distress and diversion. Mrs. Bennet and Kitty walked off, and as soon as they were gone, Mr. Collins began. 
"Believe me, my dear Miss Elizabeth, that your modesty, so far from doing you any disservice, rather adds to your other perfections. You would have been less amiable in my eyes had there NOT been this little unwillingness; but allow me to assure you, that I have your respected mother's permission for this address. You can hardly doubt the purport of my discourse, however your natural delicacy may lead you to dissemble; my attentions have been too marked to be mistaken. Almost as soon as I entered the house, I singled you out as the companion of my future life. But before I am run away with by my feelings on this subject, perhaps it would be advisable for me to state my reasons for marrying\97and, moreover, for coming into Hertfordshire with the design of selecting a wife, as I certainly did." 
The idea of Mr. Collins, with all his solemn composure, being run away with by his feelings, made Elizabeth so near laughing, that she could not use the short pause he allowed in any attempt to stop him further, and he continued: 
"My reasons for marrying are, first, that I think it a right thing for every clergyman in easy circumstances (like myself) to set the example of matrimony in his parish; secondly, that I am convinced that it will add very greatly to my happiness; and thirdly\97which perhaps I ought to have mentioned earlier, that it is the particular advice and recommendation of the very noble lady whom I have the honour of calling patroness. Twice has she condescended to give me her opinion (unasked too!) on this subject; and it was but the very Saturday night before I left Hunsford\97between our pools at quadrille, while Mrs. Jenkinson was arranging Miss de Bourgh's footstool, that she said, 'Mr. Collins, you must marry. A clergyman like you must marry. Choose properly, choose a gentlewoman for MY sake; and for your OWN, let her be an active, useful sort of person, not brought up high, but able to make a small income go a good way. This is my advice. Find such a woman as soon as you can, bring her to Hunsford, and I will visit her.' Allow me, by the way, to observe, my fair cousin, that I do not reckon the notice and kindness of Lady Catherine de Bourgh as among the least of the advantages in my power to offer. You will find her manners beyond anything I can describe; and your wit and vivacity, I think, must be acceptable to her, especially when tempered with the silence and respect which her rank will inevitably excite. Thus much for my general intention in favour of matrimony; it remains to be told why my views were directed towards Longbourn instead of my own neighbourhood, where I can assure you there are many amiable young women. But the fact is, that being, as I am, to inherit this estate after the death of your honoured father (who, however, may live many years longer), I could not satisfy myself without resolving to choose a wife from among his daughters, that the loss to them might be as little as possible, when the melancholy event takes place\97which, however, as I have already said, may not be for several years. This has been my motive, my fair cousin, and I flatter myself it will not sink me in your esteem. And now nothing remains but for me but to assure you in the most animated language of the violence of my affection. To fortune I am perfectly indifferent, and shall make no demand of that nature on your father, since I am well aware that it could not be complied with; and that one thousand pounds in the four per cents, which will not be yours till after your mother's decease, is all that you may ever be entitled to. On that head, therefore, I shall be uniformly silent; and you may assure yourself that no ungenerous reproach shall ever pass my lips when we are married." 
It was absolutely necessary to interrupt him now. 
"You are too hasty, sir," she cried. "You forget that I have made no answer. Let me do it without further loss of time. Accept my thanks for the compliment you are paying me. I am very sensible of the honour of your proposals, but it is impossible for me to do otherwise than to decline them." 
"I am not now to learn," replied Mr. Collins, with a formal wave of the hand, "that it is usual with young ladies to reject the addresses of the man whom they secretly mean to accept, when he first applies for their favour; and that sometimes the refusal is repeated a second, or even a third time. I am therefore by no means discouraged by what you have just said, and shall hope to lead you to the altar ere long." 
"Upon my word, sir," cried Elizabeth, "your hope is a rather extraordinary one after my declaration. I do assure you that I am not one of those young ladies (if such young ladies there are) who are so daring as to risk their happiness on the chance of being asked a second time. I am perfectly serious in my refusal. You could not make ME happy, and I am convinced that I am the last woman in the world who could make you so. Nay, were your friend Lady Catherine to know me, I am persuaded she would find me in every respect ill qualified for the situation." 
"Were it certain that Lady Catherine would think so," said Mr. Collins very gravely\97"but I cannot imagine that her ladyship would at all disapprove of you. And you may be certain when I have the honour of seeing her again, I shall speak in the very highest terms of your modesty, economy, and other amiable qualification." 
"Indeed, Mr. Collins, all praise of me will be unnecessary. You must give me leave to judge for myself, and pay me the compliment of believing what I say. I wish you very happy and very rich, and by refusing you hand, do all in my power to prevent your being otherwise. In making me the offer, you must have satisfied the delicacy of your feelings with regard to my family, and may take possession of Longbourn estate whenever it falls, without any self-reproach. This matter may be considered, therefore, as finally settled." And rising as she thus spoke, she would have quitted the room, had Mr. Collins not thus addressed her: 
"When I do myself the honour of speaking to you next on the subject, I shall hope to receive a more favourable answer than you have now given me; though I am far from accusing you of cruelty at present, because I know it to be the established custom of your sex to reject a man on the first application, and perhaps you have even now said as much to encourage my suit as would be consistent with the true delicacy of the female character." 
"Really, Mr. Collins," cried Elizabeth with some warmth, "you puzzle me exceedingly. If what I have hitherto said can appear to you in the form of encouragement, I know not how to express my refusal in such a way as to convince you of its being one." 
"You must give me leave to flatter myself, my dear cousin, that your refusal of my addresses is merely words of course. My reasons for believing it are briefly these: It does not appear to me that my hand is unworthy your acceptance, or that the establishment I can offer would be any other than highly desirable. My situation in life, my connections with the family of de Bourgh, and my relationship to your own, are circumstances highly in my favour; and you should take it into further consideration, that in spite of your manifold attractions, it is by no means certain that another offer of marriage may ever be made you. Your portion is unhappily so small that it will in all likelihood undo the effects of your loveliness and amiable qualifications. As I must therefore conclude that you are not serious in your rejection of me, I shall choose to attribute it to your wish of increasing my love by suspense, according to the usual practice of elegant females." 
"I do assure you, sir, that I have no pretensions whatever to that kind of elegance which consists in tormenting a respectable man. I would rather be paid the compliment of being believed sincere. I thank you again and again for the honour you have done me in your proposals, but to accept them is absolutely impossible. My feelings in every respect forbid it. Can I speak plainer? Do not consider me now as an elegant female, intending to plague you, but as a rational creature, speaking the truth from her heart." 
"You are uniformly charming!" cried he, with an air of awkward gallantry; "and I am persuaded that when sanctioned by the express authority of both your excellent parents, my proposals will not fail of being acceptable." 
To such perseverance in wilful self-deception Elizabeth would make no reply, and immediately and in silence withdrew; determined, if he persisted in considering her repeated refusals as flattering encouragement, to apply to her father, whose negative might be uttered in such a manner as to be decisive, and whose behavior at least could not be mistaken for the affectation and coquetry of an elegant female. 
Chapter 20
Mr. Collins was not left long to the silent contemplation of his successful love; for Mrs. Bennet, having dawdled about in the vestibule to watch for the end of the conference, no sooner saw Elizabeth open the door and with quick step pass her towards the staircase, than she entered the breakfast-room, and congratulated both him and herself in warm terms on the happy prospect or their nearer connection. Mr. Collins received and returned these felicitations with equal pleasure, and then proceeded to relate the particulars of their interview, with the result of which he trusted he had every reason to be satisfied, since the refusal which his cousin had steadfastly given him would naturally flow from her bashful modesty and the genuine delicacy of her character. 
This information, however, startled Mrs. Bennet; she would have been glad to be equally satisfied that her daughter had meant to encourage him by protesting against his proposals, but she dared not believe it, and could not help saying so. 
"But, depend upon it, Mr. Collins," she added, "that Lizzy shall be brought to reason. I will speak to her about it directly. She is a very headstrong, foolish girl, and does not know her own interest but I will MAKE her know it." 
"Pardon me for interrupting you, madam," cried Mr. Collins; "but if she is really headstrong and foolish, I know not whether she would altogether be a very desirable wife to a man in my situation, who naturally looks for happiness in the marriage state. If therefore she actually persists in rejecting my suit, perhaps it were better not to force her into accepting me, because if liable to such defects of temper, she could not contribute much to my felicity." 
"Sir, you quite misunderstand me," said Mrs. Bennet, alarmed. "Lizzy is only headstrong in such matters as these. In everything else she is as good-natured a girl as ever lived. I will go directly to Mr. Bennet, and we shall very soon settle it with her, I am sure." 
She would not give him time to reply, but hurrying instantly to her husband, called out as she entered the library, "Oh! Mr. Bennet, you are wanted immediately; we are all in an uproar. You must come and make Lizzy marry Mr. Collins, for she vows she will not have him, and if you do not make haste he will change his mind and not have HER." 
Mr. Bennet raised his eyes from his book as she entered, and fixed them on her face with a calm unconcern which was not in the least altered by her communication. 
"I have not the pleasure of understanding you," said he, when she had finished her speech. "Of what are you talking?" 
"Of Mr. Collins and Lizzy. Lizzy declares she will not have Mr. Collins, and Mr. Collins begins to say that he will not have Lizzy." 
"And what am I to do on the occasion? It seems an hopeless business." 
"Speak to Lizzy about it yourself. Tell her that you insist upon her marrying him." 
"Let her be called down. She shall hear my opinion." 
Mrs. Bennet rang the bell, and Miss Elizabeth was summoned to the library. 
"Come here, child," cried her father as she appeared. "I have sent for you on an affair of importance. I understand that Mr. Collins has made you an offer of marriage. Is it true?" Elizabeth replied that it was. "Very well\97and this offer of marriage you have refused?" 
"I have, sir." 
"Very well. We now come to the point. Your mother insists upon your accepting it. Is it not so, Mrs. Bennet?" 
"Yes, or I will never see her again." 
"An unhappy alternative is before you, Elizabeth. From this day you must be a stranger to one of your parents. Your mother will never see you again if you do NOT marry Mr. Collins, and I will never see you again if you DO." 
Elizabeth could not but smile at such a conclusion of such a beginning, but Mrs. Bennet, who had persuaded herself that her husband regarded the affair as she wished, was excessively disappointed. 
"What do you mean, Mr. Bennet, in talking this way? You promised me to INSIST upon her marrying him." 
"My dear," replied her husband, "I have two small favours to request. First, that you will allow me the free use of my understanding on the present occasion; and secondly, of my room. I shall be glad to have the library to myself as soon as may be." 
Not yet, however, in spite of her disappointment in her husband, did Mrs. Bennet give up the point. She talked to Elizabeth again and again; coaxed and threatened her by turns. She endeavoured to secure Jane in her interest; but Jane, with all possible mildness, declined interfering; and Elizabeth, sometimes with real earnestness, and sometimes with playful gaiety, replied to her attacks. Though her manner varied, however, her determination never did. 
Mr. Collins, meanwhile, was meditating in solitude on what had passed. He thought too well of himself to comprehend on what motives his cousin could refuse him; and though his pride was hurt, he suffered in no other way. His regard for her was quite imaginary; and the possibility of her deserving her mother's reproach prevented his feeling any regret. 
While the family were in this confusion, Charlotte Lucas came to spend the day with them. She was met in the vestibule by Lydia, who, flying to her, cried in a half whisper, "I am glad you are come, for there is such fun here! What do you think has happened this morning? Mr. Collins has made an offer to Lizzy, and she will not have him." 
Charlotte hardly had time to answer, before they were joined by Kitty, who came to tell the same news; and no sooner had they entered the breakfast-room, where Mrs. Bennet was alone, than she likewise began on the subject, calling on Miss Lucas for her compassion, and entreating her to persuade her friend Lizzy to comply with the wishes of all her family. "Pray do, my dear Miss Lucas," she added in a melancholy tone, "for nobody is on my side, nobody takes part with me. I am cruelly used, nobody feels for my poor nerves." 
Charlotte's reply was spared by the entrance of Jane and Elizabeth. 
"Aye, there she comes," continued Mrs. Bennet, "looking as unconcerned as may be, and caring no more for us than if we were at York, provided she can have her own way. But I tell you, Miss Lizzy\97if you take it into your head to go on refusing every offer of marriage in this way, you will never get a husband at all\97and I am sure I do not know who is to maintain you when your father is dead. I shall not be able to keep you\97and so I warn you. I have done with you from this very day. I told you in the library, you know, that I should never speak to you again, and you will find me as good as my word. I have no pleasure in talking to undutiful children. Not that I have much pleasure, indeed, in talking to anybody. People who suffer as I do from nervous complaints can have no great inclination for talking. Nobody can tell what I suffer! But it is always so. Those who do not complain are never pitied." 
Her daughters listened in silence to this effusion, sensible that any attempt to reason with her or soothe her would only increase the irritation. She talked on, therefore, without interruption from any of them, till they were joined by Mr. Collins, who entered the room with an air more stately than usual, and on perceiving whom, she said to the girls, "Now, I do insist upon it, that you, all of you, hold your tongues, and let me and Mr. Collins have a little conversation together." 
Elizabeth passed quietly out of the room, Jane and Kitty followed, but Lydia stood her ground, determined to hear all she could; and Charlotte, detained first by the civility of Mr. Collins, whose inquiries after herself and all her family were very minute, and then by a little curiosity, satisfied herself with walking to the window and pretending not to hear. In a doleful voice Mrs. Bennet began the projected conversation: "Oh! Mr. Collins!" 
"My dear madam," replied he, "let us be for ever silent on this point. Far be it from me," he presently continued, in a voice that marked his displeasure, "to resent the behaviour of your daughter. Resignation to inevitable evils is the evil duty of us all; the peculiar duty of a young man who has been so fortunate as I have been in early preferment; and I trust I am resigned. Perhaps not the less so from feeling a doubt of my positive happiness had my fair cousin honoured me with her hand; for I have often observed that resignation is never so perfect as when the blessing denied begins to lose somewhat of its value in our estimation. You will not, I hope, consider me as showing any disrespect to your family, my dear madam, by thus withdrawing my pretensions to your daughter's favour, without having paid yourself and Mr. Bennet the compliment of requesting you to interpose your authority in my behalf. My conduct may, I fear, be objectionable in having accepted my dismission from your daughter's lips instead of your own. But we are all liable to error. I have certainly meant well through the whole affair. My object has been to secure an amiable companion for myself, with due consideration for the advantage of all your family, and if my MANNER has been at all reprehensible, I here beg leave to apologise." 
Chapter 21
The discussion of Mr. Collins's offer was now nearly at an end, and Elizabeth had only to suffer from the uncomfortable feelings necessarily attending it, and occasionally from some peevish allusions of her mother. As for the gentleman himself, HIS feelings were chiefly expressed, not by embarrassment or dejection, or by trying to avoid her, but by stiffness of manner and resentful silence. He scarcely ever spoke to her, and the assiduous attentions which he had been so sensible of himself were transferred for the rest of the day to Miss Lucas, whose civility in listening to him was a seasonable relief to them all, and especially to her friend. 
The morrow produced no abatement of Mrs. Bennet's ill-humour or ill health. Mr. Collins was also in the same state of angry pride. Elizabeth had hoped that his resentment might shorten his visit, but his plan did not appear in the least affected by it. He was always to have gone on Saturday, and to Saturday he meant to stay. 
After breakfast, the girls walked to Meryton to inquire if Mr. Wickham were returned, and to lament over his absence from the Netherfield ball. He joined them on their entering the town, and attended them to their aunt's where his regret and vexation, and the concern of everybody, was well talked over. To Elizabeth, however, he voluntarily acknowledged that the necessity of his absence HAD been self-imposed. 
"I found," said he, "as the time drew near that I had better not meet Mr. Darcy; that to be in the same room, the same party with him for so many hours together, might be more than I could bear, and that scenes might arise unpleasant to more than myself." 
She highly approved his forbearance, and they had leisure for a full discussion of it, and for all the commendation which they civilly bestowed on each other, as Wickham and another officer walked back with them to Longbourn, and during the walk he particularly attended to her. His accompanying them was a double advantage; she felt all the compliment it offered to herself, and it was most acceptable as an occasion of introducing him to her father and mother. 
Soon after their return, a letter was delivered to Miss Bennet; it came from Netherfield. The envelope contained a sheet of elegant, little, hot-pressed paper, well covered with a lady's fair, flowing hand; and Elizabeth saw her sister's countenance change as she read it, and saw her dwelling intently on some particular passages. Jane recollected herself soon, and putting the letter away, tried to join with her usual cheerfulness in the general conversation; but Elizabeth felt an anxiety on the subject which drew off her attention even from Wickham; and no sooner had he and he companion taken leave, than a glance from Jane invited her to follow her upstairs. When they had gained their own room, Jane, taking out the letter, said: 
"This is from Caroline Bingley; what it contains has surprised me a good deal. The whole party have left Netherfield by this time, and are on their way to town\97and without any intention of coming back again. You shall hear what she says." 
She then read the first sentence aloud, which comprised the information of their having just resolved to follow their brother to town directly, and of their meaning to dine in Grosvenor Street, where Mr. Hurst had a house. The next was in these words: "I do not pretend to regret anything I shall leave in Hertfordshire, except your society, my dearest friend; but we will hope, at some future period, to enjoy many returns of that delightful intercourse we have known, and in the meanwhile may lessen the pain of separation by a very frequent and most unreserved correspondence. I depend on you for that." To these highflown expressions Elizabeth listened with all the insensibility of distrust; and though the suddenness of their removal surprised her, she saw nothing in it really to lament; it was not to be supposed that their absence from Netherfield would prevent Mr. Bingley's being there; and as to the loss of their society, she was persuaded that Jane must cease to regard it, in the enjoyment of his. 
"It is unlucky," said she, after a short pause, "that you should not be able to see your friends before they leave the country. But may we not hope that the period of future happiness to which Miss Bingley looks forward may arrive earlier than she is aware, and that the delightful intercourse you have known as friends will be renewed with yet greater satisfaction as sisters? Mr. Bingley will not be detained in London by them." 
"Caroline decidedly says that none of the party will return into Hertfordshire this winter. I will read it to you: 
"When my brother left us yesterday, he imagined that the business which took him to London might be concluded in three or four days; but as we are certain it cannot be so, and at the same time convinced that when Charles gets to town he will be in no hurry to leave it again, we have determined on following him thither, that he may not be obliged to spend his vacant hours in a comfortless hotel. Many of my acquaintances are already there for the winter; I wish that I could hear that you, my dearest friend, had any intention of making one of the crowd\97but of that I despair. I sincerely hope your Christmas in Hertfordshire may abound in the gaieties which that season generally brings, and that your beaux will be so numerous as to prevent your feeling the loss of the three of whom we shall deprive you." 
"It is evident by this," added Jane, "that he comes back no more this winter." 
"It is only evident that Miss Bingley does not mean that he SHOULD." 
"Why will you think so? It must be his own doing. He is his own master. But you do not know ALL. I WILL read you the passage which particularly hurts me. I will have no reserves from YOU." 
"Mr. Darcy is impatient to see his sister; and, to confess the truth, WE are scarcely less eager to meet her again. I really do not think Georgiana Darcy has her equal for beauty, elegance, and accomplishments; and the affection she inspires in Louisa and myself is heightened into something still more interesting, from the hope we dare entertain of her being hereafter our sister. I do not know whether I ever before mentioned to you my feelings on this subject; but I will not leave the country without confiding them, and I trust you will not esteem them unreasonable. My brother admires her greatly already; he will have frequent opportunity now of seeing her on the most intimate footing; her relations all wish the connection as much as his own; and a sister's partiality is not misleading me, I think, when I call Charles most capable of engaging any woman's heart. With all these circumstances to favour an attachment, and nothing to prevent it, am I wrong, my dearest Jane, in indulging the hope of an event which will secure the happiness of so many?" 
"What do you think of THIS sentence, my dear Lizzy?" said Jane as she finished it. "Is it not clear enough? Does it not expressly declare that Caroline neither expects nor wishes me to be her sister; that she is perfectly convinced of her brother's indifference; and that if she suspects the nature of my feelings for him, she means (most kindly!) to put me on my guard? Can there be any other opinion on the subject?" 
"Yes, there can; for mine is totally different. Will you hear it?" 
"Most willingly." 
"You shall have it in a few words. Miss Bingley sees that her brother is in love with you, and wants him to marry Miss Darcy. She follows him to town in hope of keeping him there, and tries to persuade you that he does not care about you." 
Jane shook her head. 
"Indeed, Jane, you ought to believe me. No one who has ever seen you together can doubt his affection. Miss Bingley, I am sure, cannot. She is not such a simpleton. Could she have seen half as much love in Mr. Darcy for herself, she would have ordered her wedding clothes. But the case is this: We are not rich enough or grand enough for them; and she is the more anxious to get Miss Darcy for her brother, from the notion that when there has been ONE intermarriage, she may have less trouble in achieving a second; in which there is certainly some ingenuity, and I dare say it would succeed, if Miss de Bourgh were out of the way. But, my dearest Jane, you cannot seriously imagine that because Miss Bingley tells you her brother greatly admires Miss Darcy, he is in the smallest degree less sensible of YOUR merit than when he took leave of you on Tuesday, or that it will be in her power to persuade him that, instead of being in love with you, he is very much in love with her friend." 
"If we thought alike of Miss Bingley," replied Jane, "your representation of all this might make me quite easy. But I know the foundation is unjust. Caroline is incapable of wilfully deceiving anyone; and all that I can hope in this case is that she is deceiving herself." 
"That is right. You could not have started a more happy idea, since you will not take comfort in mine. Believe her to be deceived, by all means. You have now done your duty by her, and must fret no longer." 
"But, my dear sister, can I be happy, even supposing the best, in accepting a man whose sisters and friends are all wishing him to marry elsewhere?" 
"You must decide for yourself," said Elizabeth; "and if, upon mature deliberation, you find that the misery of disobliging his two sisters is more than equivalent to the happiness of being his wife, I advise you by all means to refuse him." 
"How can you talk so?" said Jane, faintly smiling. "You must know that though I should be exceedingly grieved at their disapprobation, I could not hesitate." 
"I did not think you would; and that being the case, I cannot consider your situation with much compassion." 
"But if he returns no more this winter, my choice will never be required. A thousand things may arise in six months!" 
The idea of his returning no more Elizabeth treated with the utmost contempt. It appeared to her merely the suggestion of Caroline's interested wishes, and she could not for a moment suppose that those wishes, however openly or artfully spoken, could influence a young man so totally independent of everyone. 
She represented to her sister as forcibly as possible what she felt on the subject, and had soon the pleasure of seeing its happy effect. Jane's temper was not desponding, and she was gradually led to hope, though the diffidence of affection sometimes overcame the hope, that Bingley would return to Netherfield and answer every wish of her heart. 
They agreed that Mrs. Bennet should only hear of the departure of the family, without being alarmed on the score of the gentleman's conduct; but even this partial communication gave her a great deal of concern, and she bewailed it as exceedingly unlucky that the ladies should happen to go away just as they were all getting so intimate together. After lamenting it, however, at some length, she had the consolation that Mr. Bingley would be soon down again and soon dining at Longbourn, and the conclusion of all was the comfortable declaration, that though he had been invited only to a family dinner, she would take care to have two full courses. 
Chapter 22
The Bennets were engaged to dine with the Lucases and again during the chief of the day was Miss Lucas so kind as to listen to Mr. Collins. Elizabeth took an opportunity of thanking her. "It keeps him in good humour," said she, "and I am more obliged to you than I can express." Charlotte assured her friend of her satisfaction in being useful, and that it amply repaid her for the little sacrifice of her time. This was very amiable, but Charlotte's kindness extended farther than Elizabeth had any conception of; its object was nothing else than to secure her from any return of Mr. Collins's addresses, by engaging them towards herself. Such was Miss Lucas's scheme; and appearances were so favourable, that when they parted at night, she would have felt almost secure of success if he had not been to leave Hertfordshire so very soon. But here she did injustice to the fire and independence of his character, for it led him to escape out of Longbourn House the next morning with admirable slyness, and hasten to Lucas Lodge to throw himself at her feet. He was anxious to avoid the notice of his cousins, from a conviction that if they saw him depart, they could not fail to conjecture his design, and he was not willing to have the attempt known till its success might be known likewise; for though feeling almost secure, and with reason, for Charlotte had been tolerably encouraging, he was comparatively diffident since the adventure of Wednesday. His reception, however, was of the most flattering kind. Miss Lucas perceived him from an upper window as he walked towards the house, and instantly set out to meet him accidentally in the lane. But little had she dared to hope that so much love and eloquence awaited her there. 
In as short a time as Mr. Collins's long speeches would allow, everything was settled between them to the satisfaction of both; and as they entered the house he earnestly entreated her to name the day that was to make him the happiest of men; and though such a solicitation must be waived for the present, the lady felt no inclination to trifle with his happiness. The stupidity with which he was favoured by nature must guard his courtship from any charm that could make a woman wish for its continuance; and Miss Lucas, who accepted him solely from the pure and disinterested desire of an establishment, cared not how soon that establishment were gained. 
Sir William and Lady Lucas were speedily applied to for their consent; and it was bestowed with a most joyful alacrity. Mr. Collins's present circumstances made it a most eligible match for their daughter, to whom they could give little fortune; and his prospects of future wealth were exceedingly fair. Lady Lucas began directly to calculate, with more interest than the matter had ever excited before, how many years longer Mr. Bennet was likely to live; and Sir William gave it as his decided opinion, that whenever Mr. Collins should be in possession of the Longbourn estate, it would be highly expedient that both he and his wife should make their appearance at St. James's. The whole family, in short, were properly overjoyed on the occasion. The younger girls formed hopes of COMING OUT a year or two sooner than they might otherwise have done; and the boys were relieved from their apprehension of Charlotte's dying an old maid. Charlotte herself was tolerably composed. She had gained her point, and had time to consider of it. Her reflections were in general satisfactory. Mr. Collins, to be sure, was neither sensible nor agreeable; his society was irksome, and his attachment to her must be imaginary. But still he would be her husband. Without thinking highly either of men or matrimony, marriage had always been her object; it was the only provision for well-educated young women of small fortune, and however uncertain of giving happiness, must be their pleasantest preservative from want. This preservative she had now obtained; and at the age of twenty-seven, without having ever been handsome, she felt all the good luck of it. The least agreeable circumstance in the business was the surprise it must occasion to Elizabeth Bennet, whose friendship she valued beyond that of any other person. Elizabeth would wonder, and probably would blame her; and though her resolution was not to be shaken, her feelings must be hurt by such a disapprobation. She resolved to give her the information herself, and therefore charged Mr. Collins, when he returned to Longbourn to dinner, to drop no hint of what had passed before any of the family. A promise of secrecy was of course very dutifully given, but it could not be kept without difficulty; for the curiosity excited by his long absence burst forth in such very direct questions on his return as required some ingenuity to evade, and he was at the same time exercising great self-denial, for he was longing to publish his prosperous love. 
As he was to begin his journey too early on the morrow to see any of the family, the ceremony of leave-taking was performed when the ladies moved for the night; and Mrs. Bennet, with great politeness and cordiality, said how happy they should be to see him at Longbourn again, whenever his engagements might allow him to visit them. 
"My dear madam," he replied, "this invitation is particularly gratifying, because it is what I have been hoping to receive; and you may be very certain that I shall avail myself of it as soon as possible." 
They were all astonished; and Mr. Bennet, who could by no means wish for so speedy a return, immediately said: 
"But is there not danger of Lady Catherine's disapprobation here, my good sir? You had better neglect your relations than run the risk of offending your patroness." 
"My dear sir," replied Mr. Collins," I am particularly obliged to you for this friendly caution, and you may depend upon my not taking so material a step without her ladyship's concurrence." 
"You cannot be too much upon your guard. Risk anything rather than her displeasure; and if you find it likely to be raised by your coming to us again, which I should think exceedingly probable, stay quietly at home, and be satisfied that WE shall take no offence." 
"Believe me, my dear sir, my gratitude is warmly excited by such affectionate attention; and depend upon it, you will speedily receive from me a letter of thanks for this, and for every other mark of your regard during my stay in Hertfordshire. As for my fair cousins, though my absence may not be long enough to render it necessary, I shall now take the liberty of wishing them health and happiness, not excepting my cousin Elizabeth." 
With proper civilities the ladies then withdrew; all of them equally surprised that he meditated a quick return. Mrs. Bennet wished to understand by it that he thought of paying his addresses to one of her younger girls, and Mary might have been prevailed on to accept him. She rated his abilities much higher than any of the others; there was a solidity in his reflections which often struck her, and though by no means so clever as herself, she thought that if encouraged to read and improve himself by such an example as hers, he might become a very agreeable companion. But on the following morning, every hope of this kind was done away. Miss Lucas called soon after breakfast, and in a private conference with Elizabeth related the event of the day before. 
The possibility of Mr. Collins's fancying herself in love with her friend had once occurred to Elizabeth within the last day or two; but that Charlotte could encourage him seemed almost as far from possibility as she could encourage him herself, and her astonishment was consequently so great as to overcome at first the bounds of decorum, and she could not help crying out: 
"Engaged to Mr. Collins! My dear Charlotte\97impossible!" 
The steady countenance which Miss Lucas had commanded in telling her story, gave way to a momentary confusion here on receiving so direct a reproach; though, as it was no more than she expected, she soon regained her composure, and calmly replied: 
"Why should you be surprised, my dear Eliza? Do you think it incredible that Mr. Collins should be able to procure any woman's good opinion, because he was not so happy as to succeed with you?" 
But Elizabeth had now recollected herself, and making a strong effort for it, was able to assure with tolerable firmness that the prospect of their relationship was highly grateful to her, and that she wished her all imaginable happiness. 
"I see what you are feeling," replied Charlotte. "You must be surprised, very much surprised\97so lately as Mr. Collins was wishing to marry you. But when you have had time to think it over, I hope you will be satisfied with what I have done. I am not romantic, you know; I never was. I ask only a comfortable home; and considering Mr. Collins's character, connection, and situation in life, I am convinced that my chance of happiness with him is as fair as most people can boast on entering the marriage state." 
Elizabeth quietly answered "Undoubtedly;" and after an awkward pause, they returned to the rest of the family. Charlotte did not stay much longer, and Elizabeth was then left to reflect on what she had heard. It was a long time before she became at all reconciled to the idea of so unsuitable a match. The strangeness of Mr. Collins's making two offers of marriage within three days was nothing in comparison of his being now accepted. She had always felt that Charlotte's opinion of matrimony was not exactly like her own, but she had not supposed it to be possible that, when called into action, she would have sacrificed every better feeling to worldly advantage. Charlotte the wife of Mr. Collins was a most humiliating picture! And to the pang of a friend disgracing herself and sunk in her esteem, was added the distressing conviction that it was impossible for that friend to be tolerably happy in the lot she had chosen. 
Chapter 23
Elizabeth was sitting with her mother and sisters, reflecting on what she had heard, and doubting whether she was authorised to mention it, when Sir William Lucas himself appeared, sent by his daughter, to announce her engagement to the family. With many compliments to them, and much self-gratulation on the prospect of a connection between the houses, he unfolded the matter\97to an audience not merely wondering, but incredulous; for Mrs. Bennet, with more perseverance than politeness, protested he must be entirely mistaken; and Lydia, always unguarded and often uncivil, boisterously exclaimed: 
"Good Lord! Sir William, how can you tell such a story? Do not you know that Mr. Collins wants to marry Lizzy?" 
Nothing less than the complaisance of a courtier could have borne without anger such treatment; but Sir William's good breeding carried him through it all; and though he begged leave to be positive as to the truth of his information, he listened to all their impertinence with the most forbearing courtesy. 
Elizabeth, feeling it incumbent on her to relieve him from so unpleasant a situation, now put herself forward to confirm his account, by mentioning her prior knowledge of it from Charlotte herself; and endeavoured to put a stop to the exclamations of her mother and sisters by the earnestness of her congratulations to Sir William, in which she was readily joined by Jane, and by making a variety of remarks on the happiness that might be expected from the match, the excellent character of Mr. Collins, and the convenient distance of Hunsford from London. 
Mrs. Bennet was in fact too much overpowered to say a great deal while Sir William remained; but no sooner had he left them than her feelings found a rapid vent. In the first place, she persisted in disbelieving the whole of the matter; secondly, she was very sure that Mr. Collins had been taken in; thirdly, she trusted that they would never be happy together; and fourthly, that the match might be broken off. Two inferences, however, were plainly deduced from the whole: one, that Elizabeth was the real cause of the mischief; and the other that she herself had been barbarously misused by them all; and on these two points she principally dwelt during the rest of the day. Nothing could console and nothing could appease her. Nor did that day wear out her resentment. A week elapsed before she could see Elizabeth without scolding her, a month passed away before she could speak to Sir William or Lady Lucas without being rude, and many months were gone before she could at all forgive their daughter. 
Mr. Bennet's emotions were much more tranquil on the occasion, and such as he did experience he pronounced to be of a most agreeable sort; for it gratified him, he said, to discover that Charlotte Lucas, whom he had been used to think tolerably sensible, was as foolish as his wife, and more foolish than his daughter! 
Jane confessed herself a little surprised at the match; but she said less of her astonishment than of her earnest desire for their happiness; nor could Elizabeth persuade her to consider it as improbable. Kitty and Lydia were far from envying Miss Lucas, for Mr. Collins was only a clergyman; and it affected them in no other way than as a piece of news to spread at Meryton. 
Lady Lucas could not be insensible of triumph on being able to retort on Mrs. Bennet the comfort of having a daughter well married; and she called at Longbourn rather oftener than usual to say how happy she was, though Mrs. Bennet's sour looks and ill-natured remarks might have been enough to drive happiness away. 
Between Elizabeth and Charlotte there was a restraint which kept them mutually silent on the subject; and Elizabeth felt persuaded that no real confidence could ever subsist between them again. Her disappointment in Charlotte made her turn with fonder regard to her sister, of whose rectitude and delicacy she was sure her opinion could never be shaken, and for whose happiness she grew daily more anxious, as Bingley had now been gone a week and nothing more was heard of his return. 
Jane had sent Caroline an early answer to her letter, and was counting the days till she might reasonably hope to hear again. The promised letter of thanks from Mr. Collins arrived on Tuesday, addressed to their father, and written with all the solemnity of gratitude which a twelvemonth's abode in the family might have prompted. After discharging his conscience on that head, he proceeded to inform them, with many rapturous expressions, of his happiness in having obtained the affection of their amiable neighbour, Miss Lucas, and then explained that it was merely with the view of enjoying her society that he had been so ready to close with their kind wish of seeing him again at Longbourn, whither he hoped to be able to return on Monday fortnight; for Lady Catherine, he added, so heartily approved his marriage, that she wished it to take place as soon as possible, which he trusted would be an unanswerable argument with his amiable Charlotte to name an early day for making him the happiest of men. 
Mr. Collins's return into Hertfordshire was no longer a matter of pleasure to Mrs. Bennet. On the contrary, she was as much disposed to complain of it as her husband. It was very strange that he should come to Longbourn instead of to Lucas Lodge; it was also very inconvenient and exceedingly troublesome. She hated having visitors in the house while her health was so indifferent, and lovers were of all people the most disagreeable. Such were the gentle murmurs of Mrs. Bennet, and they gave way only to the greater distress of Mr. Bingley's continued absence. 
Neither Jane nor Elizabeth were comfortable on this subject. Day after day passed away without bringing any other tidings of him than the report which shortly prevailed in Meryton of his coming no more to Netherfield the whole winter; a report which highly incensed Mrs. Bennet, and which she never failed to contradict as a most scandalous falsehood. 
Even Elizabeth began to fear\97not that Bingley was indifferent\97but that his sisters would be successful in keeping him away. Unwilling as she was to admit an idea so destructive of Jane's happiness, and so dishonorable to the stability of her lover, she could not prevent its frequently occurring. The united efforts of his two unfeeling sisters and of his overpowering friend, assisted by the attractions of Miss Darcy and the amusements of London might be too much, she feared, for the strength of his attachment. 
As for Jane, HER anxiety under this suspense was, of course, more painful than Elizabeth's, but whatever she felt she was desirous of concealing, and between herself and Elizabeth, therefore, the subject was never alluded to. But as no such delicacy restrained her mother, an hour seldom passed in which she did not talk of Bingley, express her impatience for his arrival, or even require Jane to confess that if he did not come back she would think herself very ill used. It needed all Jane's steady mildness to bear these attacks with tolerable tranquillity. 
Mr. Collins returned most punctually on Monday fortnight, but his reception at Longbourn was not quite so gracious as it had been on his first introduction. He was too happy, however, to need much attention; and luckily for the others, the business of love-making relieved them from a great deal of his company. The chief of every day was spent by him at Lucas Lodge, and he sometimes returned to Longbourn only in time to make an apology for his absence before the family went to bed. 
Mrs. Bennet was really in a most pitiable state. The very mention of anything concerning the match threw her into an agony of ill-humour, and wherever she went she was sure of hearing it talked of. The sight of Miss Lucas was odious to her. As her successor in that house, she regarded her with jealous abhorrence. Whenever Charlotte came to see them, she concluded her to be anticipating the hour of possession; and whenever she spoke in a low voice to Mr. Collins, was convinced that they were talking of the Longbourn estate, and resolving to turn herself and her daughters out of the house, as soon as Mr. Bennet were dead. She complained bitterly of all this to her husband. 
"Indeed, Mr. Bennet," said she, "it is very hard to think that Charlotte Lucas should ever be mistress of this house, that I should be forced to make way for HER, and live to see her take her place in it!" 
"My dear, do not give way to such gloomy thoughts. Let us hope for better things. Let us flatter ourselves that I may be the survivor." 
This was not very consoling to Mrs. Bennet, and therefore, instead of making any answer, she went on as before. 
"I cannot bear to think that they should have all this estate. If it was not for the entail, I should not mind it." 
"What should not you mind?" 
"I should not mind anything at all." 
"Let us be thankful that you are preserved from a state of such insensibility." 
"I never can be thankful, Mr. Bennet, for anything about the entail. How anyone could have the conscience to entail away an estate from one's own daughters, I cannot understand; and all for the sake of Mr. Collins too! Why should HE have it more than anybody else?" 
"I leave it to yourself to determine," said Mr. Bennet. 
Chapter 24
Miss Bingley's letter arrived, and put an end to doubt. The very first sentence conveyed the assurance of their being all settled in London for the winter, and concluded with her brother's regret at not having had time to pay his respects to his friends in Hertfordshire before he left the country. 
Hope was over, entirely over; and when Jane could attend to the rest of the letter, she found little, except the professed affection of the writer, that could give her any comfort. Miss Darcy's praise occupied the chief of it. Her many attractions were again dwelt on, and Caroline boasted joyfully of their increasing intimacy, and ventured to predict the accomplishment of the wishes which had been unfolded in her former letter. She wrote also with great pleasure of her brother's being an inmate of Mr. Darcy's house, and mentioned with raptures some plans of the latter with regard to new furniture. 
Elizabeth, to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this, heard it in silent indignation. Her heart was divided between concern for her sister, and resentment against all others. To Caroline's assertion of her brother's being partial to Miss Darcy she paid no credit. That he was really fond of Jane, she doubted no more than she had ever done; and much as she had always been disposed to like him, she could not think without anger, hardly without contempt, on that easiness of temper, that want of proper resolution, which now made him the slave of his designing friends, and led him to sacrifice of his own happiness to the caprice of their inclination. Had his own happiness, however, been the only sacrifice, he might have been allowed to sport with it in whatever manner he thought best, but her sister's was involved in it, as she thought he must be sensible himself. It was a subject, in short, on which reflection would be long indulged, and must be unavailing. She could think of nothing else; and yet whether Bingley's regard had really died away, or were suppressed by his friends' interference; whether he had been aware of Jane's attachment, or whether it had escaped his observation; whatever were the case, though her opinion of him must be materially affected by the difference, her sister's situation remained the same, her peace equally wounded. 
A day or two passed before Jane had courage to speak of her feelings to Elizabeth; but at last, on Mrs. Bennet's leaving them together, after a longer irritation than usual about Netherfield and its master, she could not help saying: 
"Oh, that my dear mother had more command over herself! She can have no idea of the pain she gives me by her continual reflections on him. But I will not repine. It cannot last long. He will be forgot, and we shall all be as we were before." 
Elizabeth looked at her sister with incredulous solicitude, but said nothing. 
"You doubt me," cried Jane, slightly colouring; "indeed, you have no reason. He may live in my memory as the most amiable man of my acquaintance, but that is all. I have nothing either to hope or fear, and nothing to reproach him with. Thank God! I have not THAT pain. A little time, therefore\97I shall certainly try to get the better." 
With a stronger voice she soon added, "I have this comfort immediately, that it has not been more than an error of fancy on my side, and that it has done no harm to anyone but myself." 
"My dear Jane!" exclaimed Elizabeth, "you are too good. Your sweetness and disinterestedness are really angelic; I do not know what to say to you. I feel as if I had never done you justice, or loved you as you deserve." 
Miss Bennet eagerly disclaimed all extraordinary merit, and threw back the praise on her sister's warm affection. 
"Nay," said Elizabeth, "this is not fair. YOU wish to think all the world respectable, and are hurt if I speak ill of anybody. I only want to think YOU perfect, and you set yourself against it. Do not be afraid of my running into any excess, of my encroaching on your privilege of universal good-will. You need not. There are few people whom I really love, and still fewer of whom I think well. The more I see of the world, the more am I dissatisfied with it; and every day confirms my belief of the inconsistency of all human characters, and of the little dependence that can be placed on the appearance of merit or sense. I have met with two instances lately, one I will not mention; the other is Charlotte's marriage. It is unaccountable! In every view it is unaccountable!" 
"My dear Lizzy, do not give way to such feelings as these. They will ruin your happiness. You do not make allowance enough for difference of situation and temper. Consider Mr. Collins's respectability, and Charlotte's steady, prudent character. Remember that she is one of a large family; that as to fortune, it is a most eligible match; and be ready to believe, for everybody's sake, that she may feel something like regard and esteem for our cousin." 
"To oblige you, I would try to believe almost anything, but no one else could be benefited by such a belief as this; for were I persuaded that Charlotte had any regard for him, I should only think worse of her understanding than I now do of her heart. My dear Jane, Mr. Collins is a conceited, pompous, narrow-minded, silly man; you know he is, as well as I do; and you must feel, as well as I do, that the woman who married him cannot have a proper way of thinking. You shall not defend her, though it is Charlotte Lucas. You shall not, for the sake of one individual, change the meaning of principle and integrity, nor endeavour to persuade yourself or me, that selfishness is prudence, and insensibility of danger security for happiness." 
"I must think your language too strong in speaking of both," replied Jane; "and I hope you will be convinced of it by seeing them happy together. But enough of this. You alluded to something else. You mentioned TWO instances. I cannot misunderstand you, but I entreat you, dear Lizzy, not to pain me by thinking THAT PERSON to blame, and saying your opinion of him is sunk. We must not be so ready to fancy ourselves intentionally injured. We must not expect a lively young man to be always so guarded and circumspect. It is very often nothing but our own vanity that deceives us. Women fancy admiration means more than it does." 
"And men take care that they should." 
"If it is designedly done, they cannot be justified; but I have no idea of there being so much design in the world as some persons imagine. 
"I am far from attributing any part of Mr. Bingley's conduct to design," said Elizabeth; "but without scheming to do wrong, or to make others unhappy, there may be error, and there may be misery. Thoughtlessness, want of attention to other people's feelings, and want of resolution, will do the business." 
"And do you impute it to either of those?" 
"Yes; to the last. But if I go on, I shall displease you by saying what I think of persons you esteem. Stop me whilst you can." 
"You persist, then, in supposing his sisters influence him?" 
Yes, in conjunction with his friend." 
"I cannot believe it. Why should they try to influence him? They can only wish his happiness; and if he is attached to me, no other woman can secure it." 
"Your first position is false. They may wish many things besides his happiness; they may wish his increase of wealth and consequence; they may wish him to marry a girl who has all the importance of money, great connections, and pride." 
"Beyond a doubt, they DO wish him to choose Miss Darcy," replied Jane; "but this may be from better feelings than you are supposing. They have known her much longer than they have known me; no wonder if they love her better. But, whatever may be their own wishes, it is very unlikely they should have opposed their brother's. What sister would think herself at liberty to do it, unless there were something very objectionable? If they believed him attached to me, they would not try to part us; if he were so, they could not succeed. By supposing such an affection, you make everybody acting unnaturally and wrong, and me most unhappy. Do not distress me by the idea. I am not ashamed of having been mistaken\97or, at least, it is light, it is nothing in comparison of what I should feel in thinking ill of him or his sisters. Let me take it in the best light, in the light in which it may be understood." 
Elizabeth could not oppose such a wish; and from this time Mr. Bingley's name was scarcely ever mentioned between them. 
Mrs. Bennet still continued to wonder and repine at his returning no more, and though a day seldom passed in which Elizabeth did not account for it clearly, there was little chance of her ever considering it with less perplexity. Her daughter endeavoured to convince her of what she did not believe herself, that his attentions to Jane had been merely the effect of a common and transient liking, which ceased when he saw her no more; but though the probability of the statement was admitted at the time, she had the same story to repeat every day. Mrs. Bennet's best comfort was that Mr. Bingley must be down again in the summer. 
Mr. Bennet treated the matter differently. "So, Lizzy," said he one day, "your sister is crossed in love, I find. I congratulate her. Next to being married, a girl likes to be crossed a little in love now and then. It is something to think of, and it gives her a sort of distinction among her companions. When is your turn to come? You will hardly bear to be long outdone by Jane. Now is your time. Here are officers enough in Meryton to disappoint all the young ladies in the country. Let Wickham be YOUR man. He is a pleasant fellow, and would jilt you creditably." 
"Thank you, sir, but a less agreeable man would satisfy me. We must not all expect Jane's good fortune." 
"True," said Mr. Bennet, "but it is a comfort to think that whatever of that kind may befall you, you have an affectionate mother who will make the most of it." 
Mr. Wickham's society was of material service in dispelling the gloom which the late perverse occurrences had thrown on many of the Longbourn family. They saw him often, and to his other recommendations was now added that of general unreserve. The whole of what Elizabeth had already heard, his claims on Mr. Darcy, and all that he had suffered from him, was now openly acknowledged and publicly canvassed; and everybody was pleased to know how much they had always disliked Mr. Darcy before they had known anything of the matter. 
Miss Bennet was the only creature who could suppose there might be any extenuating circumstances in the case, unknown to the society of Hertfordshire; her mild and steady candour always pleaded for allowances, and urged the possibility of mistakes\97but by everybody else Mr. Darcy was condemned as the worst of men. 
Chapter 25
After a week spent in professions of love and schemes of felicity, Mr. Collins was called from his amiable Charlotte by the arrival of Saturday. The pain of separation, however, might be alleviated on his side, by preparations for the reception of his bride; as he had reason to hope, that shortly after his return into Hertfordshire, the day would be fixed that was to make him the happiest of men. He took leave of his relations at Longbourn with as much solemnity as before; wished his fair cousins health and happiness again, and promised their father another letter of thanks. 
On the following Monday, Mrs. Bennet had the pleasure of receiving her brother and his wife, who came as usual to spend the Christmas at Longbourn. Mr. Gardiner was a sensible, gentlemanlike man, greatly superior to his sister, as well by nature as education. The Netherfield ladies would have had difficulty in believing that a man who lived by trade, and within view of his own warehouses, could have been so well-bred and agreeable. Mrs. Gardiner, who was several years younger than Mrs. Bennet and Mrs. Phillips, was an amiable, intelligent, elegant woman, and a great favourite with all her Longbourn nieces. Between the two eldest and herself especially, there subsisted a particular regard. They had frequently been staying with her in town. 
The first part of Mrs. Gardiner's business on her arrival was to distribute her presents and describe the newest fashions. When this was done she had a less active part to play. It became her turn to listen. Mrs. Bennet had many grievances to relate, and much to complain of. They had all been very ill-used since she last saw her sister. Two of her girls had been upon the point of marriage, and after all there was nothing in it. 
"I do not blame Jane," she continued, "for Jane would have got Mr. Bingley if she could. But Lizzy! Oh, sister! It is very hard to think that she might have been Mr. Collins's wife by this time, had it not been for her own perverseness. He made her an offer in this very room, and she refused him. The consequence of it is, that Lady Lucas will have a daughter married before I have, and that the Longbourn estate is just as much entailed as ever. The Lucases are very artful people indeed, sister. They are all for what they can get. I am sorry to say it of them, but so it is. It makes me very nervous and poorly, to be thwarted so in my own family, and to have neighbours who think of themselves before anybody else. However, your coming just at this time is the greatest of comforts, and I am very glad to hear what you tell us, of long sleeves." 
Mrs. Gardiner, to whom the chief of this news had been given before, in the course of Jane and Elizabeth's correspondence with her, made her sister a slight answer, and, in compassion to her nieces, turned the conversation. 
When alone with Elizabeth afterwards, she spoke more on the subject. "It seems likely to have been a desirable match for Jane," said she. "I am sorry it went off. But these things happen so often! A young man, such as you describe Mr. Bingley, so easily falls in love with a pretty girl for a few weeks, and when accident separates them, so easily forgets her, that these sort of inconsistencies are very frequent." 
"An excellent consolation in its way," said Elizabeth, "but it will not do for US. We do not suffer by ACCIDENT. It does not often happen that the interference of friends will persuade a young man of independent fortune to think no more of a girl whom he was violently in love with only a few days before." 
"But that expression of 'violently in love' is so hackneyed, so doubtful, so indefinite, that it gives me very little idea. It is as often applied to feelings which arise from a half-hour's acquaintance, as to a real, strong attachment. Pray, how VIOLENT WAS Mr. Bingley's love?" 
"I never saw a more promising inclination; he was growing quite inattentive to other people, and wholly engrossed by her. Every time they met, it was more decided and remarkable. At his own ball he offended two or three young ladies, by not asking them to dance; and I spoke to him twice myself, without receiving an answer. Could there be finer symptoms? Is not general incivility the very essence of love?" 
"Oh, yes!\97of that kind of love which I suppose him to have felt. Poor Jane! I am sorry for her, because, with her disposition, she may not get over it immediately. It had better have happened to YOU, Lizzy; you would have laughed yourself out of it sooner. But do you think she would be prevailed upon to go back with us? Change of scene might be of service\97and perhaps a little relief from home may be as useful as anything." 
Elizabeth was exceedingly pleased with this proposal, and felt persuaded of her sister's ready acquiescence. 
"I hope," added Mrs. Gardiner, "that no consideration with regard to this young man will influence her. We live in so different a part of town, all our connections are so different, and, as you well know, we go out so little, that it is very improbable that they should meet at all, unless he really comes to see her." 
"And THAT is quite impossible; for he is now in the custody of his friend, and Mr. Darcy would no more suffer him to call on Jane in such a part of London! My dear aunt, how could you think of it? Mr. Darcy may perhaps have HEARD of such a place as Gracechurch Street, but he would hardly think a month's ablution enough to cleanse him from its impurities, were he once to enter it; and depend upon it, Mr. Bingley never stirs without him." 
"So much the better. I hope they will not meet at all. But does not Jane correspond with his sister? SHE will not be able to help calling." 
"She will drop the acquaintance entirely." 
But in spite of the certainty in which Elizabeth affected to place this point, as well as the still more interesting one of Bingley's being withheld from seeing Jane, she felt a solicitude on the subject which convinced her, on examination, that she did not consider it entirely hopeless. It was possible, and sometimes she thought it probable, that his affection might be reanimated, and the influence of his friends successfully combated by the more natural influence of Jane's attractions. 
Miss Bennet accepted her aunt's invitation with pleasure; and the Bingleys were no otherwise in her thoughts at the same time, than as she hoped by Caroline's not living in the same house with her brother, she might occasionally spend a morning with her, without any danger of seeing him. 
The Gardiners stayed a week at Longbourn; and what with the Phillipses, the Lucases, and the officers, there was not a day without its engagement. Mrs. Bennet had so carefully provided for the entertainment of her brother and sister, that they did not once sit down to a family dinner. When the engagement was for home, some of the officers always made part of it\97of which officers Mr. Wickham was sure to be one; and on these occasion, Mrs. Gardiner, rendered suspicious by Elizabeth's warm commendation, narrowly observed them both. Without supposing them, from what she saw, to be very seriously in love, their preference of each other was plain enough to make her a little uneasy; and she resolved to speak to Elizabeth on the subject before she left Hertfordshire, and represent to her the imprudence of encouraging such an attachment. 
To Mrs. Gardiner, Wickham had one means of affording pleasure, unconnected with his general powers. About ten or a dozen years ago, before her marriage, she had spent a considerable time in that very part of Derbyshire to which he belonged. They had, therefore, many acquaintances in common; and though Wickham had been little there since the death of Darcy's father, it was yet in his power to give her fresher intelligence of her former friends than she had been in the way of procuring. 
Mrs. Gardiner had seen Pemberly, and known the late Mr. Darcy by character perfectly well. Here consequently was an inexhaustible subject of discourse. In comparing her recollection of Pemberly with the minute description which Wickham could give, and in bestowing her tribute of praise on the character of its late possessor, she was delighting both him and herself. On being made acquainted with the present Mr. Darcy's treatment of him, she tried to remember some of that gentleman's reputed disposition when quite a lad which might agree with it, and was confident at last that she recollected having heard Mr. Fitzwilliam Darcy formerly spoken of as a very proud, ill-natured boy. 
Chapter 26
Mrs. Gardiner's caution to Elizabeth was punctually and kindly given on the first favourable opportunity of speaking to her alone; after honestly telling her what she thought, she thus went on: 
"You are too sensible a girl, Lizzy, to fall in love merely because you are warned against it; and, therefore, I am not afraid of speaking openly. Seriously, I would have you be on your guard. Do not involve yourself or endeavour to involve him in an affection which the want of fortune would make so very imprudent. I have nothing to say against HIM; he is a most interesting young man; and if he had the fortune he ought to have, I should think you could not do better. But as it is, you must not let your fancy run away with you. You have sense, and we all expect you to use it. Your father would depend on YOUR resolution and good conduct, I am sure. You must not disappoint your father." 
"My dear aunt, this is being serious indeed." 
"Yes, and I hope to engage you to be serious likewise." 
"Well, then, you need not be under any alarm. I will take care of myself, and of Mr. Wickham too. He shall not be in love with me, if I can prevent it." 
"Elizabeth, you are not serious now." 
"I beg your pardon, I will try again. At present I am not in love with Mr. Wickham; no, I certainly am not. But he is, beyond all comparison, the most agreeable man I ever saw\97and if he becomes really attached to me\97I believe it will be better that he should not. I see the imprudence of it. Oh! THAT abominable Mr. Darcy! My father's opinion of me does me the greatest honour, and I should be miserable to forfeit it. My father, however, is partial to Mr. Wickham. In short, my dear aunt, I should be very sorry to be the means of making any of you unhappy; but since we see every day that where there is affection, young people are seldom withheld by immediate want of fortune from entering into engagements with each other, how can I promise to be wiser than so many of my fellow-creatures if I am tempted, or how am I even to know that it would be wisdom to resist? All that I can promise you, therefore, is not to be in a hurry. I will not be in a hurry to believe myself his first object. When I am in company with him, I will not be wishing. In short, I will do my best." 
"Perhaps it will be as well if you discourage his coming here so very often. At least, you should not REMIND you mother of inviting him." 
"As I did the other day," said Elizabeth with a conscious smile: "very true, it will be wise in me to refrain from THAT. But do not imagine that he is always here so often. It is on your account that he has been so frequently invited this week. You know my mother's ideas as to the necessity of constant company for her friends. But really, and upon my honour, I will try to do what I think to be the wisest; and now I hope you are satisfied." 
Her aunt assured her that she was, and Elizabeth having thanked her for the kindness of her hints, they parted; a wonderful instance of advice being given on such a point, without being resented. 
Mr. Collins returned into Hertfordshire soon after it had been quitted by the Gardiners and Jane; but as he took up his abode with the Lucases, his arrival was no great inconvenience to Mrs. Bennet. His marriage was now fast approaching, and she was at length so far resigned as to think it inevitable, and even repeatedly to say, in an ill-natured tone, that she "WISHED they might be happy." Thursday was to be the wedding day, and on Wednesday Miss Lucas paid her farewell visit; and when she rose to take leave, Elizabeth, ashamed of her mother's ungracious and reluctant good wishes, and sincerely affected herself, accompanied her out of the room. As they went downstairs together, Charlotte said: 
"I shall depend on hearing from you very often, Eliza." 
"THAT you certainly shall." 
"And I have another favour to ask you. Will you come and see me?" 
"We shall often meet, I hope, in Hertfordshire." 
"I am not likely to leave Kent for some time. Promise me, therefore, to come to Hunsford." 
Elizabeth could not refuse, though she foresaw little pleasure in the visit. 
"My father and Maria are coming to me in March," added Charlotte, "and I hope you will consent to be of the party. Indeed, Eliza, you will be as welcome as either of them." 
The wedding took place; the bride and bridegroom set off for Kent from the church door, and everybody had as much to say, or to hear, on the subject as usual. Elizabeth soon heard from her friend; and their correspondence was as regular and frequent as it had ever been; that it should be equally unreserved was impossible. Elizabeth could never address her without feeling that all the comfort of intimacy was over, and though determined not to slacken as a correspondent, it was for the sake of what had been, rather than what was. Charlotte's first letters were received with a good deal of eagerness; there could not but be curiosity to know how she would speak of her new home, how she would like Lady Catherine, and how happy she would dare pronounce herself to be; though, when the letters were read, Elizabeth felt that Charlotte expressed herself on every point exactly as she might have foreseen. She wrote cheerfully, seemed surrounded with comforts, and mentioned nothing which she could not praise. The house, furniture, neighbourhood, and roads, were all to her taste, and Lady Catherine's behaviour was most friendly and obliging. It was Mr. Collins's picture of Hunsford and Rosings rationally softened; and Elizabeth perceived that she must wait for her own visit there to know the rest. 
Jane had already written a few lines to her sister to announce their safe arrival in London; and when she wrote again, Elizabeth hoped it would be in her power to say something of the Bingleys. 
Her impatience for this second letter was as well rewarded as impatience generally is. Jane had been a week in town without either seeing or hearing from Caroline. She accounted for it, however, by supposing that her last letter to her friend from Longbourn had by some accident been lost. 
"My aunt," she continued, "is going to-morrow into that part of the town, and I shall take the opportunity of calling in Grosvenor Street." 
She wrote again when the visit was paid, and she had seen Miss Bingley. "I did not think Caroline in spirits," were her words, "but she was very glad to see me, and reproached me for giving her no notice of my coming to London. I was right, therefore, my last letter had never reached her. I inquired after their brother, of course. He was well, but so much engaged with Mr. Darcy that they scarcely ever saw him. I found that Miss Darcy was expected to dinner. I wish I could see her. My visit was not long, as Caroline and Mrs. Hurst were going out. I dare say I shall see them soon here." 
Elizabeth shook her head over this letter. It convinced her that accident only could discover to Mr. Bingley her sister's being in town. 
Four weeks passed away, and Jane saw nothing of him. She endeavoured to persuade herself that she did not regret it; but she could no longer be blind to Miss Bingley's inattention. After waiting at home every morning for a fortnight, and inventing every evening a fresh excuse for her, the visitor did at last appear; but the shortness of her stay, and yet more, the alteration of her manner would allow Jane to deceive herself no longer. The letter which she wrote on this occasion to her sister will prove what she felt. 
"My dearest Lizzy will, I am sure, be incapable of triumphing in her better judgement, at my expense, when I confess myself to have been entirely deceived in Miss Bingley's regard for me. But, my dear sister, though the event has proved you right, do not think me obstinate if I still assert that, considering what her behaviour was, my confidence was as natural as your suspicion. I do not at all comprehend her reason for wishing to be intimate with me; but if the same circumstances were to happen again, I am sure I should be deceived again. Caroline did not return my visit till yesterday; and not a note, not a line, did I receive in the meantime. When she did come, it was very evident that she had no pleasure in it; she made a slight, formal apology, for not calling before, said not a word of wishing to see me again, and was in every respect so altered a creature, that when she went away I was perfectly resolved to continue the acquaintance no longer. I pity, though I cannot help blaming her. She was very wrong in singling me out as she did; I can safely say that every advance to intimacy began on her side. But I pity her, because she must feel that she has been acting wrong, and because I am very sure that anxiety for her brother is the cause of it. I need not explain myself farther; and though WE know this anxiety to be quite needless, yet if she feels it, it will easily account for her behaviour to me; and so deservedly dear as he is to his sister, whatever anxiety she must feel on his behalf is natural and amiable. I cannot but wonder, however, at her having any such fears now, because, if he had at all cared about me, we must have met, long ago. He knows of my being in town, I am certain, from something she said herself; and yet it would seem, by her manner of talking, as if she wanted to persuade herself that he is really partial to Miss Darcy. I cannot understand it. If I were not afraid of judging harshly, I should be almost tempted to say that there is a strong appearance of duplicity in all this. But I will endeavour to banish every painful thought, and think only of what will make me happy\97your affection, and the invariable kindness of my dear uncle and aunt. Let me hear from you very soon. Miss Bingley said something of his never returning to Netherfield again, of giving up the house, but not with any certainty. We had better not mention it. I am extremely glad that you have such pleasant accounts from our friends at Hunsford. Pray go to see them, with Sir William and Maria. I am sure you will be very comfortable there.\97Yours, etc." 
This letter gave Elizabeth some pain; but her spirits returned as she considered that Jane would no longer be duped, by the sister at least. All expectation from the brother was now absolutely over. She would not even wish for a renewal of his attentions. His character sunk on every review of it; and as a punishment for him, as well as a possible advantage to Jane, she seriously hoped he might really soon marry Mr. Darcy's sister, as by Wickham's account, she would make him abundantly regret what he had thrown away. 
Mrs. Gardiner about this time reminded Elizabeth of her promise concerning that gentleman, and required information; and Elizabeth had such to send as might rather give contentment to her aunt than to herself. His apparent partiality had subsided, his attentions were over, he was the admirer of some one else. Elizabeth was watchful enough to see it all, but she could see it and write of it without material pain. Her heart had been but slightly touched, and her vanity was satisfied with believing that SHE would have been his only choice, had fortune permitted it. The sudden acquisition of ten thousand pounds was the most remarkable charm of the young lady to whom he was now rendering himself agreeable; but Elizabeth, less clear-sighted perhaps in this case than in Charlotte's, did not quarrel with him for his wish of independence. Nothing, on the contrary, could be more natural; and while able to suppose that it cost him a few struggle to relinquish her, she was ready to allow it a wise and desirable measure for both, and could very sincerely wish him happy. 
All this was acknowledged to Mrs. Gardiner; and after relating the circumstances, she thus went on: "I am now convinced, my dear aunt, that I have never been much in love; for had I really experienced that pure and elevating passion, I should at present detest his very name, and wish him all manner of evil. But my feelings are not only cordial towards HIM; they are even impartial towards Miss King. I cannot find out that I hate her at all, or that I am in the least unwilling to think her a very good sort of girl. There can be no love in all this. My watchfulness has been effectual; and though I certainly should be a more interesting object to all my acquaintances were I distractedly in love with him, I cannot say that I regret my comparative insignificance. Importance may sometimes be purchased too dearly. Kitty and Lydia take his defection much more to heart than I do. They are young in the ways of the world, and not yet open to the mortifying conviction that handsome young men must have something to live on as well as the plain." 
Chapter 27
With no greater events than these in the Longbourn family, and otherwise diversified by little beyond the walks to Meryton, sometimes dirty and sometimes cold, did January and February pass away. March was to take Elizabeth to Hunsford. She had not at first thought very seriously of going thither; but Charlotte, she soon found, was depending on the plan and she gradually learned to consider it herself with greater pleasure as well as greater certainty. Absence had increased her desire of seeing Charlotte again, and weakened her disgust of Mr. Collins. There was novelty in the scheme, and as, with such a mother and such uncompanionable sisters, home could not be faultless, a little change was not unwelcome for its own sake. The journey would moreover give her a peep at Jane; and, in short, as the time drew near, she would have been very sorry for any delay. Everything, however, went on smoothly, and was finally settled according to Charlotte's first sketch. She was to accompany Sir William and his second daughter. The improvement of spending a night in London was added in time, and the plan became perfect as plan could be. 
The only pain was in leaving her father, who would certainly miss her, and who, when it came to the point, so little liked her going, that he told her to write to him, and almost promised to answer her letter. 
The farewell between herself and Mr. Wickham was perfectly friendly; on his side even more. His present pursuit could not make him forget that Elizabeth had been the first to excite and to deserve his attention, the first to listen and to pity, the first to be admired; and in his manner of bidding her adieu, wishing her every enjoyment, reminding her of what she was to expect in Lady Catherine de Bourgh, and trusting their opinion of her\97their opinion of everybody\97would always coincide, there was a solicitude, an interest which she felt must ever attach her to him with a most sincere regard; and she parted from him convinced that, whether married or single, he must always be her model of the amiable and pleasing. 
Her fellow-travellers the next day were not of a kind to make her think him less agreeable. Sir William Lucas, and his daughter Maria, a good-humoured girl, but as empty-headed as himself, had nothing to say that could be worth hearing, and were listened to with about as much delight as the rattle of the chaise. Elizabeth loved absurdities, but she had known Sir William's too long. He could tell her nothing new of the wonders of his presentation and knighthood; and his civilities were worn out, like his information. 
It was a journey of only twenty-four miles, and they began it so early as to be in Gracechurch Street by noon. As they drove to Mr. Gardiner's door, Jane was at a drawing-room window watching their arrival; when they entered the passage she was there to welcome them, and Elizabeth, looking earnestly in her face, was pleased to see it healthful and lovely as ever. On the stairs were a troop of little boys and girls, whose eagerness for their cousin's appearance would not allow them to wait in the drawing-room, and whose shyness, as they had not seen her for a twelvemonth, prevented their coming lower. All was joy and kindness. The day passed most pleasantly away; the morning in bustle and shopping, and the evening at one of the theatres. 
Elizabeth then contrived to sit by her aunt. Their first object was her sister; and she was more grieved than astonished to hear, in reply to her minute inquiries, that though Jane always struggled to support her spirits, there were periods of dejection. It was reasonable, however, to hope that they would not continue long. Mrs. Gardiner gave her the particulars also of Miss Bingley's visit in Gracechurch Street, and repeated conversations occurring at different times between Jane and herself, which proved that the former had, from her heart, given up the acquaintance. 
Mrs. Gardiner then rallied her niece on Wickham's desertion, and complimented her on bearing it so well. 
"But my dear Elizabeth," she added, "what sort of girl is Miss King? I should be sorry to think our friend mercenary." 
"Pray, my dear aunt, what is the difference in matrimonial affairs, between the mercenary and the prudent motive? Where does discretion end, and avarice begin? Last Christmas you were afraid of his marrying me, because it would be imprudent; and now, because he is trying to get a girl with only ten thousand pounds, you want to find out that he is mercenary." 
"If you will only tell me what sort of girl Miss King is, I shall know what to think." 
"She is a very good kind of girl, I believe. I know no harm of her." 
"But he paid her not the smallest attention till her grandfather's death made her mistress of this fortune." 
"No\97what should he? If it were not allowable for him to gain MY affections because I had no money, what occasion could there be for making love to a girl whom he did not care about, and who was equally poor?" 
"But there seems an indelicacy in directing his attentions towards her so soon after this event." 
"A man in distressed circumstances has not time for all those elegant decorums which other people may observe. If SHE does not object to it, why should WE?" 
"HER not objecting does not justify HIM. It only shows her being deficient in something herself\97sense or feeling." 
"Well," cried Elizabeth, "have it as you choose. HE shall be mercenary, and SHE shall be foolish." 
"No, Lizzy, that is what I do NOT choose. I should be sorry, you know, to think ill of a young man who has lived so long in Derbyshire." 
"Oh! if that is all, I have a very poor opinion of young men who live in Derbyshire; and their intimate friends who live in Hertfordshire are not much better. I am sick of them all. Thank Heaven! I am going to-morrow where I shall find a man who has not one agreeable quality, who has neither manner nor sense to recommend him. Stupid men are the only ones worth knowing, after all." 
"Take care, Lizzy; that speech savours strongly of disappointment." 
Before they were separated by the conclusion of the play, she had the unexpected happiness of an invitation to accompany her uncle and aunt in a tour of pleasure which they proposed taking in the summer. 
"We have not determined how far it shall carry us," said Mrs. Gardiner, "but, perhaps, to the Lakes." 
No scheme could have been more agreeable to Elizabeth, and her acceptance of the invitation was most ready and grateful. "Oh, my dear, dear aunt," she rapturously cried, "what delight! what felicity! You give me fresh life and vigour. Adieu to disappointment and spleen. What are young men to rocks and mountains? Oh! what hours of transport we shall spend! And when we DO return, it shall not be like other travellers, without being able to give one accurate idea of anything. We WILL know where we have gone\97we WILL recollect what we have seen. Lakes, mountains, and rivers shall not be jumbled together in our imaginations; nor when we attempt to describe any particular scene, will we begin quarreling about its relative situation. Let OUR first effusions be less insupportable than those of the generality of travellers." 
Chapter 28
Every object in the next day's journey was new and interesting to Elizabeth; and her spirits were in a state of enjoyment; for she had seen her sister looking so well as to banish all fear for her health, and the prospect of her northern tour was a constant source of delight. 
When they left the high road for the lane to Hunsford, every eye was in search of the Parsonage, and every turning expected to bring it in view. The palings of Rosings Park was their boundary on one side. Elizabeth smiled at the recollection of all that she had heard of its inhabitants. 
At length the Parsonage was discernible. The garden sloping to the road, the house standing in it, the green pales, and the laurel hedge, everything declared they were arriving. Mr. Collins and Charlotte appeared at the door, and the carriage stopped at the small gate which led by a short gravel walk to the house, amidst the nods and smiles of the whole party. In a moment they were all out of the chaise, rejoicing at the sight of each other. Mrs. Collins welcomed her friend with the liveliest pleasure, and Elizabeth was more and more satisfied with coming when she found herself so affectionately received. She saw instantly that her cousin's manners were not altered by his marriage; his formal civility was just what it had been, and he detained her some minutes at the gate to hear and satisfy his inquiries after all her family. They were then, with no other delay than his pointing out the neatness of the entrance, taken into the house; and as soon as they were in the parlour, he welcomed them a second time, with ostentatious formality to his humble abode, and punctually repeated all his wife's offers of refreshment. 
Elizabeth was prepared to see him in his glory; and she could not help in fancying that in displaying the good proportion of the room, its aspect and its furniture, he addressed himself particularly to her, as if wishing to make her feel what she had lost in refusing him. But though everything seemed neat and comfortable, she was not able to gratify him by any sigh of repentance, and rather looked with wonder at her friend that she could have so cheerful an air with such a companion. When Mr. Collins said anything of which his wife might reasonably be ashamed, which certainly was not unseldom, she involuntarily turned her eye on Charlotte. Once or twice she could discern a faint blush; but in general Charlotte wisely did not hear. After sitting long enough to admire every article of furniture in the room, from the sideboard to the fender, to give an account of their journey, and of all that had happened in London, Mr. Collins invited them to take a stroll in the garden, which was large and well laid out, and to the cultivation of which he attended himself. To work in this garden was one of his most respectable pleasures; and Elizabeth admired the command of countenance with which Charlotte talked of the healthfulness of the exercise, and owned she encouraged it as much as possible. Here, leading the way through every walk and cross walk, and scarcely allowing them an interval to utter the praises he asked for, every view was pointed out with a minuteness which left beauty entirely behind. He could number the fields in every direction, and could tell how many tress there were in the most distant clump. But of all the views which his garden, or which the country or kingdom could boast, none were to be compared with the prospect of Rosings, afforded by an opening in the trees that bordered the park nearly opposite the front of his house. It was a handsome modern building, well situated on rising ground. 
From his garden, Mr. Collins would have led them round his two meadows; but the ladies, not having shoes to encounter the remains of a white frost, turned back; and while Sir William accompanied him, Charlotte took her sister and friend over the house, extremely well pleased, probably, to have the opportunity of showing it without her husband's help. It was rather small, but well built and convenient; and everything was fitted up and arranged with a neatness and consistency of which Elizabeth gave Charlotte all the credit. When Mr. Collins could be forgotten, there was really an air of great comfort throughout, and by Charlotte's evident enjoyment of it, Elizabeth supposed he must be often forgotten. 
She had already learnt that Lady Catherine was still in the country. It was spoken of again while they were at dinner, when Mr. Collins joining in, observed: 
"Yes, Miss Elizabeth, you will have the honour of seeing Lady Catherine de Bourgh on the ensuing Sunday at church, and I need not say you will be delighted with her. She is all affability and condescension, and I doubt not but you will be honoured with some portion of her notice when service is over. I have scarcely any hesitation in saying she will include you and my sister Maria in every invitation with which she honours us during your stay here. Her behaviour to my dear Charlotte is charming. We dine at Rosings twice every week, and are never allowed to walk home. Her ladyship's carriage is regularly ordered for us. I SHOULD say, one of her ladyship's carriages, for she has several." 
"Lady Catherine is a very respectable, sensible woman indeed, added Charlotte, "and a most attentive neighbour." 
"Very true, my dear, that is exactly what I say. She is the sort of woman whom one cannot regard with too much deference." 
The evening was spent chiefly in talking over Hertfordshire news, and telling again what had already been written; and when it closed, Elizabeth, in the solitude of her chamber, had to meditate upon Charlotte's degree of contentment, to understand her address in guiding, and composure in bearing with, her husband, and to acknowledge that it was all done very well. She had also to anticipate how her visit would pass, the quiet tenor of their usual employments, the vexatious interruptions of Mr. Collins, and the gaieties of their intercourse with Rosings. A lively imagination soon settled it all. 
About the middle of the next day, as she was in her room getting ready for a walk, a sudden noise below seemed to speak the whole house in confusion; and, after listening a moment, she heard somebody running upstairs in a violent hurry, and calling loudly after her. She opened the door and met Maria in the landing place, who, breathless with agitation, cried out\97 
"Oh, my dear Eliza! pray make haste and come into the dining-room, for there is such a sight to be seen! I will not tell you what it is. Make haste, and come down this moment." 
Elizabeth asked questions in vain; Maria would tell her nothing more, and down they ran into the dining-room, which fronted the lane, in quest of this wonder; It was two ladies stopping in a low phaeton at the garden gate. 
"And is this all?" cried Elizabeth. "I expected at least that the pigs were got into the garden, and here is nothing but Lady Catherine and her daughter." 
"La! my dear," said Maria, quite shocked at the mistake, "it is not Lady Catherine. The old lady is Mrs. Jenkinson, who lives with them; the other is Miss de Bourgh. Only look at her. She is quite a little creature. Who would have thought that she could be so thin and small?" 
"She is abominably rude to keep Charlotte out of doors in all this wind. Why does she not come in?" 
"Oh, Charlotte says she hardly ever does. It is the greatest of favours when Miss de Bourgh comes in." 
"I like her appearance," said Elizabeth, struck with other ideas. "She looks sickly and cross. Yes, she will do for him very well. She will make him a very proper wife." 
Mr. Collins and Charlotte were both standing at the gate in conversation with the ladies; and Sir William, to Elizabeth's high diversion, was stationed in the doorway, in earnest contemplation of the greatness before him, and constantly bowing whenever Miss de Bourgh looked that way. 
At length there was nothing more to be said; the ladies drove on, and the others returned into the house. Mr. Collins no sooner saw the two girls than he began to congratulate them on their good fortune, which Charlotte explained by letting them know that the whole party was asked to dine at Rosings the next day. 
Chapter 29
Mr. Collins's triumph, in consequence of this invitation, was complete. The power of displaying the grandeur of his patroness to his wondering visitors, and of letting them see her civility towards himself and his wife, was exactly what he had wished for; and that an opportunity of doing it should be given so soon, was such an instance of Lady Catherine's condescension, as he knew not how to admire enough. 
"I confess," said he, "that I should not have been at all surprised by her ladyship's asking us on Sunday to drink tea and spend the evening at Rosings. I rather expected, from my knowledge of her affability, that it would happen. But who could have foreseen such an attention as this? Who could have imagined that we should receive an invitation to dine there (an invitation, moreover, including the whole party) so immediately after your arrival!" 
"I am the less surprised at what has happened," replied Sir William, "from that knowledge of what the manners of the great really are, which my situation in life has allowed me to acquire. About the court, such instances of elegant breeding are not uncommon." 
Scarcely anything was talked of the whole day or next morning but their visit to Rosings. Mr. Collins was carefully instructing them in what they were to expect, that the sight of such rooms, so many servants, and so splendid a dinner, might not wholly overpower them. 
When the ladies were separating for the toilette, he said to Elizabeth\97 
"Do not make yourself uneasy, my dear cousin, about your apparel. Lady Catherine is far from requiring that elegance of dress in us which becomes herself and her daughter. I would advise you merely to put on whatever of your clothes is superior to the rest\97there is no occasion for anything more. Lady Catherine will not think the worse of you for being simply dressed. She likes to have the distinction of rank preserved." 
While they were dressing, he came two or three times to their different doors, to recommend their being quick, as Lady Catherine very much objected to be kept waiting for her dinner. Such formidable accounts of her ladyship, and her manner of living, quite frightened Maria Lucas who had been little used to company, and she looked forward to her introduction at Rosings with as much apprehension as her father had done to his presentation at St. James's. 
As the weather was fine, they had a pleasant walk of about half a mile across the park. Every park has its beauty and its prospects; and Elizabeth saw much to be pleased with, though she could not be in such raptures as Mr. Collins expected the scene to inspire, and was but slightly affected by his enumeration of the windows in front of the house, and his relation of what the glazing altogether had originally cost Sir Lewis de Bourgh. 
When they ascended the steps to the hall, Maria's alarm was every moment increasing, and even Sir William did not look perfectly calm. Elizabeth's courage did not fail her. She had heard nothing of Lady Catherine that spoke her awful from any extraordinary talents or miraculous virtue, and the mere stateliness of money or rank she thought she could witness without trepidation. 
From the entrance-hall, of which Mr. Collins pointed out, with a rapturous air, the fine proportion and the finished ornaments, they followed the servants through an ante-chamber, to the room where Lady Catherine, her daughter, and Mrs. Jenkinson were sitting. Her ladyship, with great condescension, arose to receive them; and as Mrs. Collins had settled it with her husband that the office of introduction should be hers, it was performed in a proper manner, without any of those apologies and thanks which he would have thought necessary. 
In spite of having been at St. James's Sir William was so completely awed by the grandeur surrounding him, that he had but just courage enough to make a very low bow, and take his seat without saying a word; and his daughter, frightened almost out of her senses, sat on the edge of her chair, not knowing which way to look. Elizabeth found herself quite equal to the scene, and could observe the three ladies before her composedly. Lady Catherine was a tall, large woman, with strongly-marked features, which might once have been handsome. Her air was not conciliating, nor was her manner of receiving them such as to make her visitors forget their inferior rank. She was not rendered formidable by silence; but whatever she said was spoken in so authoritative a tone, as marked her self-importance, and brought Mr. Wickham immediately to Elizabeth's mind; and from the observation of the day altogether, she believed Lady Catherine to be exactly what he represented. 
When, after examining the mother, in whose countenance and deportment she soon found some resemblance of Mr. Darcy, she turned her eyes on the daughter, she could almost have joined in Maria's astonishment at her being so thin and so small. There was neither in figure nor face any likeness between the ladies. Miss de Bourgh was pale and sickly; her features, though not plain, were insignificant; and she spoke very little, except in a low voice, to Mrs. Jenkinson, in whose appearance there was nothing remarkable, and who was entirely engaged in listening to what she said, and placing a screen in the proper direction before her eyes. 
After sitting a few minutes, they were all sent to one of the windows to admire the view, Mr. Collins attending them to point out its beauties, and Lady Catherine kindly informing them that it was much better worth looking at in the summer. 
The dinner was exceedingly handsome, and there were all the servants and all the articles of plate which Mr. Collins had promised; and, as he had likewise foretold, he took his seat at the bottom of the table, by her ladyship's desire, and looked as if he felt that life could furnish nothing greater. He carved, and ate, and praised with delighted alacrity; and every dish was commended, first by him and then by Sir William, who was now enough recovered to echo whatever his son-in-law said, in a manner which Elizabeth wondered Lady Catherine could bear. But Lady Catherine seemed gratified by their excessive admiration, and gave most gracious smiles, especially when any dish on the table proved a novelty to them. The party did not supply much conversation. Elizabeth was ready to speak whenever there was an opening, but she was seated between Charlotte and Miss de Bourgh\97the former of whom was engaged in listening to Lady Catherine, and the latter said not a word to her all dinner-time. Mrs. Jenkinson was chiefly employed in watching how little Miss de Bourgh ate, pressing her to try some other dish, and fearing she was indisposed. Maria thought speaking out of the question, and the gentlemen did nothing but eat and admire. 
When the ladies returned to the drawing-room, there was little to be done but to hear Lady Catherine talk, which she did without any intermission till coffee came in, delivering her opinion on every subject in so decisive a manner, as proved that she was not used to have her judgement controverted. She inquired into Charlotte's domestic concerns familiarly and minutely, gave her a great deal of advice as to the management of them all; told her how everything ought to be regulated in so small a family as hers, and instructed her as to the care of her cows and her poultry. Elizabeth found that nothing was beneath this great lady's attention, which could furnish her with an occasion of dictating to others. In the intervals of her discourse with Mrs. Collins, she addressed a variety of questions to Maria and Elizabeth, but especially to the latter, of whose connections she knew the least, and who she observed to Mrs. Collins was a very genteel, pretty kind of girl. She asked her, at different times, how many sisters she had, whether they were older or younger than herself, whether any of them were likely to be married, whether they were handsome, where they had been educated, what carriage her father kept, and what had been her mother's maiden name? Elizabeth felt all the impertinence of her questions but answered them very composedly. Lady Catherine then observed, 
"Your father's estate is entailed on Mr. Collins, I think. For your sake," turning to Charlotte, "I am glad of it; but otherwise I see no occasion for entailing estates from the female line. It was not thought necessary in Sir Lewis de Bourgh's family. Do you play and sing, Miss Bennet?" 
"A little." 
"Oh! then\97some time or other we shall be happy to hear you. Our instrument is a capital one, probably superior to\97\97You shall try it some day. Do your sisters play and sing?" 
"One of them does." 
"Why did not you all learn? You ought all to have learned. The Miss Webbs all play, and their father has not so good an income as yours. Do you draw?" 
"No, not at all." 
"What, none of you?" 
"Not one." 
"That is very strange. But I suppose you had no opportunity. Your mother should have taken you to town every spring for the benefit of masters." 
"My mother would have had no objection, but my father hates London." 
"Has your governess left you?" 
"We never had any governess." 
"No governess! How was that possible? Five daughters brought up at home without a governess! I never heard of such a thing. Your mother must have been quite a slave to your education." 
Elizabeth could hardly help smiling as she assured her that had not been the case. 
"Then, who taught you? who attended to you? Without a governess, you must have been neglected." 
"Compared with some families, I believe we were; but such of us as wished to learn never wanted the means. We were always encouraged to read, and had all the masters that were necessary. Those who chose to be idle, certainly might." 
"Aye, no doubt; but that is what a governess will prevent, and if I had known your mother, I should have advised her most strenuously to engage one. I always say that nothing is to be done in education without steady and regular instruction, and nobody but a governess can give it. It is wonderful how many families I have been the means of supplying in that way. I am always glad to get a young person well placed out. Four nieces of Mrs. Jenkinson are most delightfully situated through my means; and it was but the other day that I recommended another young person, who was merely accidentally mentioned to me, and the family are quite delighted with her. Mrs. Collins, did I tell you of Lady Metcalf's calling yesterday to thank me? She finds Miss Pope a treasure. 'Lady Catherine,' said she, 'you have given me a treasure.' Are any of your younger sisters out, Miss Bennet?" 
"Yes, ma'am, all." 
"All! What, all five out at once? Very odd! And you only the second. The younger ones out before the elder ones are married! Your younger sisters must be very young?" 
"Yes, my youngest is not sixteen. Perhaps SHE is full young to be much in company. But really, ma'am, I think it would be very hard upon younger sisters, that they should not have their share of society and amusement, because the elder may not have the means or inclination to marry early. The last-born has as good a right to the pleasures of youth at the first. And to be kept back on SUCH a motive! I think it would not be very likely to promote sisterly affection or delicacy of mind." 
"Upon my word," said her ladyship, "you give your opinion very decidedly for so young a person. Pray, what is your age?" 
"With three younger sisters grown up," replied Elizabeth, smiling, "your ladyship can hardly expect me to own it." 
Lady Catherine seemed quite astonished at not receiving a direct answer; and Elizabeth suspected herself to be the first creature who had ever dared to trifle with so much dignified impertinence. 
"You cannot be more than twenty, I am sure, therefore you need not conceal your age." 
"I am not one-and-twenty." 
When the gentlemen had joined them, and tea was over, the card-tables were placed. Lady Catherine, Sir William, and Mr. and Mrs. Collins sat down to quadrille; and as Miss de Bourgh chose to play at cassino, the two girls had the honour of assisting Mrs. Jenkinson to make up her party. Their table was superlatively stupid. Scarcely a syllable was uttered that did not relate to the game, except when Mrs. Jenkinson expressed her fears of Miss de Bourgh's being too hot or too cold, or having too much or too little light. A great deal more passed at the other table. Lady Catherine was generally speaking\97stating the mistakes of the three others, or relating some anecdote of herself. Mr. Collins was employed in agreeing to everything her ladyship said, thanking her for every fish he won, and apologising if he thought he won too many. Sir William did not say much. He was storing his memory with anecdotes and noble names. 
When Lady Catherine and her daughter had played as long as they chose, the tables were broken up, the carriage was offered to Mrs. Collins, gratefully accepted and immediately ordered. The party then gathered round the fire to hear Lady Catherine determine what weather they were to have on the morrow. From these instructions they were summoned by the arrival of the coach; and with many speeches of thankfulness on Mr. Collins's side and as many bows on Sir William's they departed. As soon as they had driven from the door, Elizabeth was called on by her cousin to give her opinion of all that she had seen at Rosings, which, for Charlotte's sake, she made more favourable than it really was. But her commendation, though costing her some trouble, could by no means satisfy Mr. Collins, and he was very soon obliged to take her ladyship's praise into his own hands. 
Chapter 30
Sir William stayed only a week at Hunsford, but his visit was long enough to convince him of his daughter's being most comfortably settled, and of her possessing such a husband and such a neighbour as were not often met with. While Sir William was with them, Mr. Collins devoted his morning to driving him out in his gig, and showing him the country; but when he went away, the whole family returned to their usual employments, and Elizabeth was thankful to find that they did not see more of her cousin by the alteration, for the chief of the time between breakfast and dinner was now passed by him either at work in the garden or in reading and writing, and looking out of the window in his own book-room, which fronted the road. The room in which the ladies sat was backwards. Elizabeth had at first rather wondered that Charlotte should not prefer the dining-parlour for common use; it was a better sized room, and had a more pleasant aspect; but she soon saw that her friend had an excellent reason for what she did, for Mr. Collins would undoubtedly have been much less in his own apartment, had they sat in one equally lively; and she gave Charlotte credit for the arrangement. 
From the drawing-room they could distinguish nothing in the lane, and were indebted to Mr. Collins for the knowledge of what carriages went along, and how often especially Miss de Bourgh drove by in her phaeton, which he never failed coming to inform them of, though it happened almost every day. She not unfrequently stopped at the Parsonage, and had a few minutes' conversation with Charlotte, but was scarcely ever prevailed upon to get out. 
Very few days passed in which Mr. Collins did not walk to Rosings, and not many in which his wife did not think it necessary to go likewise; and till Elizabeth recollected that there might be other family livings to be disposed of, she could not understand the sacrifice of so many hours. Now and then they were honoured with a call from her ladyship, and nothing escaped her observation that was passing in the room during these visits. She examined into their employments, looked at their work, and advised them to do it differently; found fault with the arrangement of the furniture; or detected the housemaid in negligence; and if she accepted any refreshment, seemed to do it only for the sake of finding out that Mrs. Collins's joints of meat were too large for her family. 
Elizabeth soon perceived, that though this great lady was not in commission of the peace of the county, she was a most active magistrate in her own parish, the minutest concerns of which were carried to her by Mr. Collins; and whenever any of the cottagers were disposed to be quarrelsome, discontented, or too poor, she sallied forth into the village to settle their differences, silence their complaints, and scold them into harmony and plenty. 
The entertainment of dining at Rosings was repeated about twice a week; and, allowing for the loss of Sir William, and there being only one card-table in the evening, every such entertainment was the counterpart of the first. Their other engagements were few, as the style of living in the neighbourhood in general was beyond Mr. Collins's reach. This, however, was no evil to Elizabeth, and upon the whole she spent her time comfortably enough; there were half-hours of pleasant conversation with Charlotte, and the weather was so fine for the time of year that she had often great enjoyment out of doors. Her favourite walk, and where she frequently went while the others were calling on Lady Catherine, was along the open grove which edged that side of the park, where there was a nice sheltered path, which no one seemed to value but herself, and where she felt beyond the reach of Lady Catherine's curiosity. 
In this quiet way, the first fortnight of her visit soon passed away. Easter was approaching, and the week preceding it was to bring an addition to the family at Rosings, which in so small a circle must be important. Elizabeth had heard soon after her arrival that Mr. Darcy was expected there in the course of a few weeks, and though there were not many of her acquaintances whom she did not prefer, his coming would furnish one comparatively new to look at in their Rosings parties, and she might be amused in seeing how hopeless Miss Bingley's designs on him were, by his behaviour to his cousin, for whom he was evidently destined by Lady Catherine, who talked of his coming with the greatest satisfaction, spoke of him in terms of the highest admiration, and seemed almost angry to find that he had already been frequently seen by Miss Lucas and herself. 
His arrival was soon known at the Parsonage; for Mr. Collins was walking the whole morning within view of the lodges opening into Hunsford Lane, in order to have the earliest assurance of it, and after making his bow as the carriage turned into the Park, hurried home with the great intelligence. On the following morning he hastened to Rosings to pay his respects. There were two nephews of Lady Catherine to require them, for Mr. Darcy had brought with him a Colonel Fitzwilliam, the younger son of his uncle Lord \97\97, and, to the great surprise of all the party, when Mr. Collins returned, the gentleman accompanied him. Charlotte had seen them from her husband's room, crossing the road, and immediately running into the other, told the girls what an honour they might expect, adding: 
"I may thank you, Eliza, for this piece of civility. Mr. Darcy would never have come so soon to wait upon me." 
Elizabeth had scarcely time to disclaim all right to the compliment, before their approach was announced by the door-bell, and shortly afterwards the three gentlemen entered the room. Colonel Fitzwilliam, who led the way, was about thirty, not handsome, but in person and address most truly the gentleman. Mr. Darcy looked just as he had been used to look in Hertfordshire\97paid his compliments, with his usual reserve, to Mrs. Collins, and whatever might be his feelings toward her friend, met her with every appearance of composure. Elizabeth merely curtseyed to him without saying a word. 
Colonel Fitzwilliam entered into conversation directly with the readiness and ease of a well-bred man, and talked very pleasantly; but his cousin, after having addressed a slight observation on the house and garden to Mrs. Collins, sat for some time without speaking to anybody. At length, however, his civility was so far awakened as to inquire of Elizabeth after the health of her family. She answered him in the usual way, and after a moment's pause, added: 
"My eldest sister has been in town these three months. Have you never happened to see her there?" 
She was perfectly sensible that he never had; but she wished to see whether he would betray any consciousness of what had passed between the Bingleys and Jane, and she thought he looked a little confused as he answered that he had never been so fortunate as to meet Miss Bennet. The subject was pursued no farther, and the gentlemen soon afterwards went away. 
Chapter 31
Colonel Fitzwilliam's manners were very much admired at the Parsonage, and the ladies all felt that he must add considerably to the pleasures of their engagements at Rosings. It was some days, however, before they received any invitation thither\97for while there were visitors in the house, they could not be necessary; and it was not till Easter-day, almost a week after the gentlemen's arrival, that they were honoured by such an attention, and then they were merely asked on leaving church to come there in the evening. For the last week they had seen very little of Lady Catherine or her daughter. Colonel Fitzwilliam had called at the Parsonage more than once during the time, but Mr. Darcy they had seen only at church. 
The invitation was accepted of course, and at a proper hour they joined the party in Lady Catherine's drawing-room. Her ladyship received them civilly, but it was plain that their company was by no means so acceptable as when she could get nobody else; and she was, in fact, almost engrossed by her nephews, speaking to them, especially to Darcy, much more than to any other person in the room. 
Colonel Fitzwilliam seemed really glad to see them; anything was a welcome relief to him at Rosings; and Mrs. Collins's pretty friend had moreover caught his fancy very much. He now seated himself by her, and talked so agreeably of Kent and Hertfordshire, of travelling and staying at home, of new books and music, that Elizabeth had never been half so well entertained in that room before; and they conversed with so much spirit and flow, as to draw the attention of Lady Catherine herself, as well as of Mr. Darcy. HIS eyes had been soon and repeatedly turned towards them with a look of curiosity; and that her ladyship, after a while, shared the feeling, was more openly acknowledged, for she did not scruple to call out: 
"What is that you are saying, Fitzwilliam? What is it you are talking of? What are you telling Miss Bennet? Let me hear what it is." 
"We are speaking of music, madam," said he, when no longer able to avoid a reply. 
"Of music! Then pray speak aloud. It is of all subjects my delight. I must have my share in the conversation if you are speaking of music. There are few people in England, I suppose, who have more true enjoyment of music than myself, or a better natural taste. If I had ever learnt, I should have been a great proficient. And so would Anne, if her health had allowed her to apply. I am confident that she would have performed delightfully. How does Georgiana get on, Darcy?" 
Mr. Darcy spoke with affectionate praise of his sister's proficiency. 
"I am very glad to hear such a good account of her," said Lady Catherine; "and pray tell her from me, that she cannot expect to excel if she does not practice a good deal." 
"I assure you, madam," he replied, "that she does not need such advice. She practises very constantly." 
"So much the better. It cannot be done too much; and when I next write to her, I shall charge her not to neglect it on any account. I often tell young ladies that no excellence in music is to be acquired without constant practice. I have told Miss Bennet several times, that she will never play really well unless she practises more; and though Mrs. Collins has no instrument, she is very welcome, as I have often told her, to come to Rosings every day, and play on the pianoforte in Mrs. Jenkinson's room. She would be in nobody's way, you know, in that part of the house." 
Mr. Darcy looked a little ashamed of his aunt's ill-breeding, and made no answer. 
When coffee was over, Colonel Fitzwilliam reminded Elizabeth of having promised to play to him; and she sat down directly to the instrument. He drew a chair near her. Lady Catherine listened to half a song, and then talked, as before, to her other nephew; till the latter walked away from her, and making with his usual deliberation towards the pianoforte stationed himself so as to command a full view of the fair performer's countenance. Elizabeth saw what he was doing, and at the first convenient pause, turned to him with an arch smile, and said: 
"You mean to frighten me, Mr. Darcy, by coming in all this state to hear me? I will not be alarmed though your sister DOES play so well. There is a stubbornness about me that never can bear to be frightened at the will of others. My courage always rises at every attempt to intimidate me." 
"I shall not say you are mistaken," he replied, "because you could not really believe me to entertain any design of alarming you; and I have had the pleasure of your acquaintance long enough to know that you find great enjoyment in occasionally professing opinions which in fact are not your own." 
Elizabeth laughed heartily at this picture of herself, and said to Colonel Fitzwilliam, "Your cousin will give you a very pretty notion of me, and teach you not to believe a word I say. I am particularly unlucky in meeting with a person so able to expose my real character, in a part of the world where I had hoped to pass myself off with some degree of credit. Indeed, Mr. Darcy, it is very ungenerous in you to mention all that you knew to my disadvantage in Hertfordshire\97and, give me leave to say, very impolitic too\97for it is provoking me to retaliate, and such things may come out as will shock your relations to hear." 
"I am not afraid of you," said he, smilingly. 
"Pray let me hear what you have to accuse him of," cried Colonel Fitzwilliam. "I should like to know how he behaves among strangers." 
"You shall hear then\97but prepare yourself for something very dreadful. The first time of my ever seeing him in Hertfordshire, you must know, was at a ball\97and at this ball, what do you think he did? He danced only four dances, though gentlemen were scarce; and, to my certain knowledge, more than one young lady was sitting down in want of a partner. Mr. Darcy, you cannot deny the fact." 
"I had not at that time the honour of knowing any lady in the assembly beyond my own party." 
"True; and nobody can ever be introduced in a ball-room. Well, Colonel Fitzwilliam, what do I play next? My fingers wait your orders." 
"Perhaps," said Darcy, "I should have judged better, had I sought an introduction; but I am ill-qualified to recommend myself to strangers." 
Shall we ask your cousin the reason of this?" said Elizabeth, still addressing Colonel Fitzwilliam. "Shall we ask him why a man of sense and education, and who has lived in the world, is ill qualified to recommend himself to strangers?" 
"I can answer your question," said Fitzwilliam, "without applying to him. It is because he will not give himself the trouble." 
"I certainly have not the talent which some people possess," said Darcy, "of conversing easily with those I have never seen before. I cannot catch their tone of conversation, or appear interested in their concerns, as I often see done." 
"My fingers," said Elizabeth, "do not move over this instrument in the masterly manner which I see so many women's do. They have not the same force or rapidity, and do not produce the same expression. But then I have always supposed it to be my own fault\97because I will not take the trouble of practising. It is not that I do not believe MY fingers as capable as any other woman's of superior execution." 
Darcy smiled and said, "You are perfectly right. You have employed your time much better. No one admitted to the privilege of hearing you can think anything wanting. We neither of us perform to strangers." 
Here they were interrupted by Lady Catherine, who called out to know what they were talking of. Elizabeth immediately began playing again. Lady Catherine approached, and, after listening for a few minutes, said to Darcy: 
"Miss Bennet would not play at all amiss if she practised more, and could have the advantage of a London master. She has a very good notion of fingering, though her taste is not equal to Anne's. Anne would have been a delightful performer, had her health allowed her to learn." 
Elizabeth looked at Darcy to see how cordially he assented to his cousin's praise; but neither at that moment nor at any other could she discern any symptom of love; and from the whole of his behaviour to Miss de Bourgh she derived this comfort for Miss Bingley, that he might have been just as likely to marry HER, had she been his relation. 
Lady Catherine continued her remarks on Elizabeth's performance, mixing with them many instructions on execution and taste. Elizabeth received them with all the forbearance of civility, and, at the request of the gentlemen, remained at the instrument till her ladyship's carriage was ready to take them all home. 
Chapter 32
Elizabeth was sitting by herself the next morning, and writing to Jane while Mrs. Collins and Maria were gone on business into the village, when she was startled by a ring at the door, the certain signal of a visitor. As she had heard no carriage, she thought it not unlikely to be Lady Catherine, and under that apprehension was putting away her half-finished letter that she might escape all impertinent questions, when the door opened, and, to her very great surprise, Mr. Darcy, and Mr. Darcy only, entered the room. 
He seemed astonished too on finding her alone, and apologised for his intrusion by letting her know that he had understood all the ladies were to be within. 
They then sat down, and when her inquiries after Rosings were made, seemed in danger of sinking into total silence. It was absolutely necessary, therefore, to think of something, and in this emergence recollecting WHEN she had seen him last in Hertfordshire, and feeling curious to know what he would say on the subject of their hasty departure, she observed: 
"How very suddenly you all quitted Netherfield last November, Mr. Darcy! It must have been a most agreeable surprise to Mr. Bingley to see you all after him so soon; for, if I recollect right, he went but the day before. He and his sisters were well, I hope, when you left London?" 
"Perfectly so, I thank you." 
She found that she was to receive no other answer, and, after a short pause added: 
"I think I have understood that Mr. Bingley has not much idea of ever returning to Netherfield again?" 
"I have never heard him say so; but it is probable that he may spend very little of his time there in the future. He has many friends, and is at a time of life when friends and engagements are continually increasing." 
"If he means to be but little at Netherfield, it would be better for the neighbourhood that he should give up the place entirely, for then we might possibly get a settled family there. But, perhaps, Mr. Bingley did not take the house so much for the convenience of the neighbourhood as for his own, and we must expect him to keep it or quit it on the same principle." 
"I should not be surprised," said Darcy, "if he were to give it up as soon as any eligible purchase offers." 
Elizabeth made no answer. She was afraid of talking longer of his friend; and, having nothing else to say, was now determined to leave the trouble of finding a subject to him. 
He took the hint, and soon began with, "This seems a very comfortable house. Lady Catherine, I believe, did a great deal to it when Mr. Collins first came to Hunsford." 
"I believe she did\97and I am sure she could not have bestowed her kindness on a more grateful object." 
"Mr. Collins appears to be very fortunate in his choice of a wife." 
"Yes, indeed, his friends may well rejoice in his having met with one of the very few sensible women who would have accepted him, or have made him happy if they had. My friend has an excellent understanding\97though I am not certain that I consider her marrying Mr. Collins as the wisest thing she ever did. She seems perfectly happy, however, and in a prudential light it is certainly a very good match for her." 
"It must be very agreeable for her to be settled within so easy a distance of her own family and friends." 
"An easy distance, do you call it? It is nearly fifty miles." 
"And what is fifty miles of good road? Little more than half a day's journey. Yes, I call it a VERY easy distance." 
I should never have considered the distance as one of the ADVANTAGES of the match," cried Elizabeth. "I should never have said Mrs. Collins was settled NEAR her family." 
"It is a proof of your own attachment to Hertfordshire. Anything beyond the very neighbourhood of Longbourn, I suppose, would appear far." 
As he spoke there was a sort of smile which Elizabeth fancied she understood; he must be supposing her to be thinking of Jane and Netherfield, and she blushed as she answered: 
"I do not mean to say that a woman may not be settled too near her family. The far and the near must be relative, and depend on many varying circumstances. Where there is fortune to make the expenses of travelling unimportant, distance becomes no evil. But that is not the case HERE. Mr. and Mrs. Collins have a comfortable income, but not such a one as will allow of frequent journeys\97and I am persuaded my friend would not call herself NEAR her family under less than HALF the present distance." 
Mr. Darcy drew his chair a little towards her, and said, "YOU cannot have a right to such very strong local attachment. YOU cannot have been always at Longbourn." 
Elizabeth looked surprised. The gentleman experienced some change of feeling; he drew back his chair, took a newspaper from the table, and glancing over it, said, in a colder voice: 
"Are you pleased with Kent?" 
A short dialogue on the subject of the country ensued, on either side calm and concise\97and soon put an end to by the entrance of Charlotte and her sister, just returned from her walk. The tete-a-tete surprised them. Mr. Darcy related the mistake which had occasioned his intruding on Miss Bennet, and after sitting a few minutes longer without saying much to anybody, went away. 
"What can be the meaning of this?" said Charlotte, as soon as he was gone. "My dear, Eliza, he must be in love with you, or he would never have called us in this familiar way." 
But when Elizabeth told of his silence; it did not seem very likely, even to Charlotte's wishes, to be the case; and after various conjectures, they could at last only suppose his visit to proceed from the difficulty of finding anything to do, which was the more probable from the time of year. All field sports were over. Within doors there was Lady Catherine, books, and a billiard-table, but gentlemen cannot always be within doors; and in the nearness of the Parsonage, or the pleasantness of the walk to it, or of the people who lived in it, the two cousins found a temptation from this period of walking thither almost every day. They called at various times of the morning, sometimes separately, sometimes together, and now and then accompanied by their aunt. It was plain to them all that Colonel Fitzwilliam came because he had pleasure in their society, a persuasion which of course recommended him still more; and Elizabeth was reminded by her own satisfaction in being with him, as well as by his evident admiration of her, of her former favourite George Wickham; and though, in comparing them, she saw there was less captivating softness in Colonel Fitzwilliam's manners, she believed he might have the best informed mind. 
But why Mr. Darcy came so often to the Parsonage, it was more difficult to understand. It could not be for society, as he frequently sat there ten minutes together without opening his lips; and when he did speak, it seemed the effect of necessity rather than of choice\97a sacrifice to propriety, not a pleasure to himself. He seldom appeared really animated. Mrs. Collins knew not what to make of him. Colonel Fitzwilliam's occasionally laughing at his stupidity, proved that he was generally different, which her own knowledge of him could not have told her; and as she would liked to have believed this change the effect of love, and the object of that love her friend Eliza, she set herself seriously to work to find it out. She watched him whenever they were at Rosings, and whenever he came to Hunsford; but without much success. He certainly looked at her friend a great deal, but the expression of that look was disputable. It was an earnest, steadfast gaze, but she often doubted whether there were much admiration in it, and sometimes it seemed nothing but absence of mind. 
She had once or twice suggested to Elizabeth the possibility of his being partial to her, but Elizabeth always laughed at the idea; and Mrs. Collins did not think it right to press the subject, from the danger of raising expectations which might only end in disappointment; for in her opinion it admitted not of a doubt, that all her friend's dislike would vanish, if she could suppose him to be in her power. 
In her kind schemes for Elizabeth, she sometimes planned her marrying Colonel Fitzwilliam. He was beyond comparison the most pleasant man; he certainly admired her, and his situation in life was most eligible; but, to counterbalance these advantages, Mr. Darcy had considerable patronage in the church, and his cousin could have none at all. 
Chapter 33
More than once did Elizabeth, in her ramble within the park, unexpectedly meet Mr. Darcy. She felt all the perverseness of the mischance that should bring him where no one else was brought, and, to prevent its ever happening again, took care to inform him at first that it was a favourite haunt of hers. How it could occur a second time, therefore, was very odd! Yet it did, and even a third. It seemed like wilful ill-nature, or a voluntary penance, for on these occasions it was not merely a few formal inquiries and an awkward pause and then away, but he actually thought it necessary to turn back and walk with her. He never said a great deal, nor did she give herself the trouble of talking or of listening much; but it struck her in the course of their third rencontre that he was asking some odd unconnected questions\97about her pleasure in being at Hunsford, her love of solitary walks, and her opinion of Mr. and Mrs. Collins's happiness; and that in speaking of Rosings and her not perfectly understanding the house, he seemed to expect that whenever she came into Kent again she would be staying THERE too. His words seemed to imply it. Could he have Colonel Fitzwilliam in his thoughts? She supposed, if he meant anything, he must mean and allusion to what might arise in that quarter. It distressed her a little, and she was quite glad to find herself at the gate in the pales opposite the Parsonage. 
She was engaged one day as she walked, in perusing Jane's last letter, and dwelling on some passages which proved that Jane had not written in spirits, when, instead of being again surprised by Mr. Darcy, she saw on looking up that Colonel Fitzwilliam was meeting her. Putting away the letter immediately and forcing a smile, she said: 
"I did not know before that you ever walked this way." 
"I have been making the tour of the park," he replied, "as I generally do every year, and intend to close it with a call at the Parsonage. Are you going much farther?" 
"No, I should have turned in a moment." 
And accordingly she did turn, and they walked towards the Parsonage together. 
"Do you certainly leave Kent on Saturday?" said she. 
"Yes\97if Darcy does not put it off again. But I am at his disposal. He arranges the business just as he pleases." 
"And if not able to please himself in the arrangement, he has at least pleasure in the great power of choice. I do not know anybody who seems more to enjoy the power of doing what he likes than Mr. Darcy." 
"He likes to have his own way very well," replied Colonel Fitzwilliam. "But so we all do. It is only that he has better means of having it than many others, because he is rich, and many others are poor. I speak feelingly. A younger son, you know, must be inured to self-denial and dependence." 
"In my opinion, the younger son of an earl can know very little of either. Now seriously, what have you ever known of self-denial and dependence? When have you been prevented by want of money from going wherever you chose, or procuring anything you had a fancy for?" 
"These are home questions\97and perhaps I cannot say that I have experienced many hardships of that nature. But in matters of greater weight, I may suffer from want of money. Younger sons cannot marry where they like." 
"Unless where they like women of fortune, which I think they very often do." 
Our habits of expense make us too dependent, and there are too many in my rank of life who can afford to marry without some attention to money." 
"Is this," thought Elizabeth, "meant for me?" and she coloured at the idea; but, recovering herself, said in a lively tone, "And pray, what is the usual price of an earl's younger son? Unless the elder brother is very sickly, I suppose you would not ask above fifty thousand pounds." 
He answered her in the same style, and the subject dropped. To interrupt a silence which might make him fancy her affected with what had passed, she soon afterwards said: 
"I imagine your cousin brought you down with him chiefly for the sake of having someone at his disposal. I wonder he does not marry, to secure a lasting convenience of that kind. But, perhaps, his sister does as well for the present, and, as she is under his sole care, he may do what he likes with her." 
"No," said Colonel Fitzwilliam, "that is an advantage which he must divide with me. I am joined with him in the guardianship of Miss Darcy." 
"Are you indeed? And pray what sort of guardians do you make? Does your charge give you much trouble? Young ladies of her age are sometimes a little difficult to manage, and if she has the true Darcy spirit, she may like to have her own way." 
As she spoke she observed him looking at her earnestly; and the manner in which he immediately asked her why she supposed Miss Darcy likely to give them any uneasiness, convinced her that she had somehow or other got pretty near the truth. She directly replied: 
"You need not be frightened. I never heard any harm of her; and I dare say she is one of the most tractable creatures in the world. She is a very great favourite with some ladies of my acquaintance, Mrs. Hurst and Miss Bingley. I think I have heard you say that you know them." 
"I know them a little. Their brother is a pleasant gentlemanlike man\97he is a great friend of Darcy's." 
"Oh! yes," said Elizabeth drily; "Mr. Darcy is uncommonly kind to Mr. Bingley, and takes a prodigious deal of care of him." 
"Care of him! Yes, I really believe Darcy DOES take care of him in those points where he most wants care. From something that he told me in our journey hither, I have reason to think Bingley very much indebted to him. But I ought to beg his pardon, for I have no right to suppose that Bingley was the person meant. It was all conjecture." 
"What is it you mean?" 
"It is a circumstance which Darcy could not wish to be generally known, because if it were to get round to the lady's family, it would be an unpleasant thing." 
"You may depend upon my not mentioning it." 
"And remember that I have not much reason for supposing it to be Bingley. What he told me was merely this: that he congratulated himself on having lately saved a friend from the inconveniences of a most imprudent marriage, but without mentioning names or any other particulars, and I only suspected it to be Bingley from believing him the kind of young man to get into a scrape of that sort, and from knowing them to have been together the whole of last summer." 
"Did Mr. Darcy give you reasons for this interference?" 
"I understood that there were some very strong objections against the lady." 
"And what arts did he use to separate them?" 
"He did not talk to me of his own arts," said Fitzwilliam, smiling. "He only told me what I have now told you." 
Elizabeth made no answer, and walked on, her heart swelling with indignation. After watching her a little, Fitzwilliam asked her why she was so thoughtful. 
"I am thinking of what you have been telling me," said she. "Your cousin's conduct does not suit my feelings. Why was he to be the judge?" 
"You are rather disposed to call his interference officious?" 
"I do not see what right Mr. Darcy had to decide on the propriety of his friend's inclination, or why, upon his own judgement alone, he was to determine and direct in what manner his friend was to be happy. But," she continued, recollecting herself, "as we know none of the particulars, it is not fair to condemn him. It is not to be supposed that there was much affection in the case." 
"That is not an unnatural surmise," said Fitzwilliam, "but it is a lessening of the honour of my cousin's triumph very sadly." 
This was spoken jestingly; but it appeared to her so just a picture of Mr. Darcy, that she would not trust herself with an answer, and therefore, abruptly changing the conversation talked on indifferent matters until they reached the Parsonage. There, shut into her own room, as soon as their visitor left them, she could think without interruption of all that she had heard. It was not to be supposed that any other people could be meant than those with whom she was connected. There could not exist in the world TWO men over whom Mr. Darcy could have such boundless influence. That he had been concerned in the measures taken to separate Bingley and Jane she had never doubted; but she had always attributed to Miss Bingley the principal design and arrangement of them. If his own vanity, however, did not mislead him, HE was the cause, his pride and caprice were the cause, of all that Jane had suffered, and still continued to suffer. He had ruined for a while every hope of happiness for the most affectionate, generous heart in the world; and no one could say how lasting an evil he might have inflicted. 
"There were some very strong objections against the lady," were Colonel Fitzwilliam's words; and those strong objections probably were, her having one uncle who was a country attorney, and another who was in business in London. 
"To Jane herself," she exclaimed, "there could be no possibility of objection; all loveliness and goodness as she is!\97her understanding excellent, her mind improved, and her manners captivating. Neither could anything be urged against my father, who, though with some peculiarities, has abilities Mr. Darcy himself need not disdain, and respectability which he will probably never each." When she thought of her mother, her confidence gave way a little; but she would not allow that any objections THERE had material weight with Mr. Darcy, whose pride, she was convinced, would receive a deeper wound from the want of importance in his friend's connections, than from their want of sense; and she was quite decided, at last, that he had been partly governed by this worst kind of pride, and partly by the wish of retaining Mr. Bingley for his sister. 
The agitation and tears which the subject occasioned, brought on a headache; and it grew so much worse towards the evening, that, added to her unwillingness to see Mr. Darcy, it determined her not to attend her cousins to Rosings, where they were engaged to drink tea. Mrs. Collins, seeing that she was really unwell, did not press her to go and as much as possible prevented her husband from pressing her; but Mr. Collins could not conceal his apprehension of Lady Catherine's being rather displeased by her staying at home. 
Chapter 34
When they were gone, Elizabeth, as if intending to exasperate herself as much as possible against Mr. Darcy, chose for her employment the examination of all the letters which Jane had written to her since her being in Kent. They contained no actual complaint, nor was there any revival of past occurrences, or any communication of present suffering. But in all, and in almost every line of each, there was a want of that cheerfulness which had been used to characterise her style, and which, proceeding from the serenity of a mind at ease with itself and kindly disposed towards everyone, had been scarcely ever clouded. Elizabeth noticed every sentence conveying the idea of uneasiness, with an attention which it had hardly received on the first perusal. Mr. Darcy's shameful boast of what misery he had been able to inflict, gave her a keener sense of her sister's sufferings. It was some consolation to think that his visit to Rosings was to end on the day after the next\97and, a still greater, that in less than a fortnight she should herself be with Jane again, and enabled to contribute to the recovery of her spirits, by all that affection could do. 
She could not think of Darcy's leaving Kent without remembering that his cousin was to go with him; but Colonel Fitzwilliam had made it clear that he had no intentions at all, and agreeable as he was, she did not mean to be unhappy about him. 
While settling this point, she was suddenly roused by the sound of the door-bell, and her spirits were a little fluttered by the idea of its being Colonel Fitzwilliam himself, who had once before called late in the evening, and might now come to inquire particularly after her. But this idea was soon banished, and her spirits were very differently affected, when, to her utter amazement, she saw Mr. Darcy walk into the room. In an hurried manner he immediately began an inquiry after her health, imputing his visit to a wish of hearing that she were better. She answered him with cold civility. He sat down for a few moments, and then getting up, walked about the room. Elizabeth was surprised, but said not a word. After a silence of several minutes, he came towards her in an agitated manner, and thus began: 
"In vain I have struggled. It will not do. My feelings will not be repressed. You must allow me to tell you how ardently I admire and love you." 
Elizabeth's astonishment was beyond expression. She stared, coloured, doubted, and was silent. This he considered sufficient encouragement; and the avowal of all that he felt, and had long felt for her, immediately followed. He spoke well; but there were feelings besides those of the heart to be detailed; and he was not more eloquent on the subject of tenderness than of pride. His sense of her inferiority\97of its being a degradation\97of the family obstacles which had always opposed to inclination, were dwelt on with a warmth which seemed due to the consequence he was wounding, but was very unlikely to recommend his suit. 
In spite of her deeply-rooted dislike, she could not be insensible to the compliment of such a man's affection, and though her intentions did not vary for an instant, she was at first sorry for the pain he was to receive; till, roused to resentment by his subsequent language, she lost all compassion in anger. She tried, however, to compose herself to answer him with patience, when he should have done. He concluded with representing to her the strength of that attachment which, in spite of all his endeavours, he had found impossible to conquer; and with expressing his hope that it would now be rewarded by her acceptance of his hand. As he said this, she could easily see that he had no doubt of a favourable answer. He SPOKE of apprehension and anxiety, but his countenance expressed real security. Such a circumstance could only exasperate farther, and, when he ceased, the colour rose into her cheeks, and she said: 
"In such cases as this, it is, I believe, the established mode to express a sense of obligation for the sentiments avowed, however unequally they may be returned. It is natural that obligation should be felt, and if I could FEEL gratitude, I would now thank you. But I cannot\97I have never desired your good opinion, and you have certainly bestowed it most unwillingly. I am sorry to have occasioned pain to anyone. It has been most unconsciously done, however, and I hope will be of short duration. The feelings which, you tell me, have long prevented the acknowledgment of your regard, can have little difficulty in overcoming it after this explanation." 
Mr. Darcy, who was leaning against the mantelpiece with his eyes fixed on her face, seemed to catch her words with no less resentment than surprise. His complexion became pale with anger, and the disturbance of his mind was visible in every feature. He was struggling for the appearance of composure, and would not open his lips till he believed himself to have attained it. The pause was to Elizabeth's feelings dreadful. At length, with a voice of forced calmness, he said: 
"And this is all the reply which I am to have the honour of expecting! I might, perhaps, wish to be informed why, with so little ENDEAVOUR at civility, I am thus rejected. But it is of small importance." 
"I might as well inquire," replied she, "why with so evident a desire of offending and insulting me, you chose to tell me that you liked me against your will, against your reason, and even against your character? Was not this some excuse for incivility, if I WAS uncivil? But I have other provocations. You know I have. Had not my feelings decided against you\97had they been indifferent, or had they even been favourable, do you think that any consideration would tempt me to accept the man who has been the means of ruining, perhaps for ever, the happiness of a most beloved sister?" 
As she pronounced these words, Mr. Darcy changed colour; but the emotion was short, and he listened without attempting to interrupt her while she continued: 
"I have every reason in the world to think ill of you. No motive can excuse the unjust and ungenerous part you acted THERE. You dare not, you cannot deny, that you have been the principal, if not the only means of dividing them from each other\97of exposing one to the censure of the world for caprice and instability, and the other to its derision for disappointed hopes, and involving them both in misery of the acutest kind." 
She paused, and saw with no slight indignation that he was listening with an air which proved him wholly unmoved by any feeling of remorse. He even looked at her with a smile of affected incredulity. 
"Can you deny that you have done it?" she repeated. 
With assumed tranquillity he then replied: "I have no wish of denying that I did everything in my power to separate my friend from your sister, or that I rejoice in my success. Towards HIM I have been kinder than towards myself." 
Elizabeth disdained the appearance of noticing this civil reflection, but its meaning did not escape, nor was it likely to conciliate her. 
"But it is not merely this affair," she continued, "on which my dislike is founded. Long before it had taken place my opinion of you was decided. Your character was unfolded in the recital which I received many months ago from Mr. Wickham. On this subject, what can you have to say? In what imaginary act of friendship can you here defend yourself? or under what misrepresentation can you here impose upon others?" 
"You take an eager interest in that gentleman's concerns," said Darcy, in a less tranquil tone, and with a heightened colour. 
"Who that knows what his misfortunes have been, can help feeling an interest in him?" 
"His misfortunes!" repeated Darcy contemptuously; "yes, his misfortunes have been great indeed." 
"And of your infliction," cried Elizabeth with energy. "You have reduced him to his present state of poverty\97comparative poverty. You have withheld the advantages which you must know to have been designed for him. You have deprived the best years of his life of that independence which was no less his due than his desert. You have done all this! and yet you can treat the mention of his misfortune with contempt and ridicule." 
"And this," cried Darcy, as he walked with quick steps across the room, "is your opinion of me! This is the estimation in which you hold me! I thank you for explaining it so fully. My faults, according to this calculation, are heavy indeed! But perhaps," added he, stopping in his walk, and turning towards her, "these offenses might have been overlooked, had not your pride been hurt by my honest confession of the scruples that had long prevented my forming any serious design. These bitter accusations might have been suppressed, had I, with greater policy, concealed my struggles, and flattered you into the belief of my being impelled by unqualified, unalloyed inclination; by reason, by reflection, by everything. But disguise of every sort is my abhorrence. Nor am I ashamed of the feelings I related. They were natural and just. Could you expect me to rejoice in the inferiority of your connections?\97to congratulate myself on the hope of relations, whose condition in life is so decidedly beneath my own?" 
Elizabeth felt herself growing more angry every moment; yet she tried to the utmost to speak with composure when she said: 
"You are mistaken, Mr. Darcy, if you suppose that the mode of your declaration affected me in any other way, than as it spared the concern which I might have felt in refusing you, had you behaved in a more gentlemanlike manner." 
She saw him start at this, but he said nothing, and she continued: 
"You could not have made the offer of your hand in any possible way that would have tempted me to accept it." 
Again his astonishment was obvious; and he looked at her with an expression of mingled incredulity and mortification. She went on: 
"From the very beginning\97from the first moment, I may almost say\97of my acquaintance with you, your manners, impressing me with the fullest belief of your arrogance, your conceit, and your selfish disdain of the feelings of others, were such as to form the groundwork of disapprobation on which succeeding events have built so immovable a dislike; and I had not known you a month before I felt that you were the last man in the world whom I could ever be prevailed on to marry." 
"You have said quite enough, madam. I perfectly comprehend your feelings, and have now only to be ashamed of what my own have been. Forgive me for having taken up so much of your time, and accept my best wishes for your health and happiness." 
And with these words he hastily left the room, and Elizabeth heard him the next moment open the front door and quit the house. 
The tumult of her mind, was now painfully great. She knew not how to support herself, and from actual weakness sat down and cried for half-an-hour. Her astonishment, as she reflected on what had passed, was increased by every review of it. That she should receive an offer of marriage from Mr. Darcy! That he should have been in love with her for so many months! So much in love as to wish to marry her in spite of all the objections which had made him prevent his friend's marrying her sister, and which must appear at least with equal force in his own case\97was almost incredible! It was gratifying to have inspired unconsciously so strong an affection. But his pride, his abominable pride\97his shameless avowal of what he had done with respect to Jane\97his unpardonable assurance in acknowledging, though he could not justify it, and the unfeeling manner in which he had mentioned Mr. Wickham, his cruelty towards whom he had not attempted to deny, soon overcame the pity which the consideration of his attachment had for a moment excited. She continued in very agitated reflections till the sound of Lady Catherine's carriage made her feel how unequal she was to encounter Charlotte's observation, and hurried her away to her room. 
Chapter 35
Elizabeth awoke the next morning to the same thoughts and meditations which had at length closed her eyes. She could not yet recover from the surprise of what had happened; it was impossible to think of anything else; and, totally indisposed for employment, she resolved, soon after breakfast, to indulge herself in air and exercise. She was proceeding directly to her favourite walk, when the recollection of Mr. Darcy's sometimes coming there stopped her, and instead of entering the park, she turned up the lane, which led farther from the turnpike-road. The park paling was still the boundary on one side, and she soon passed one of the gates into the ground. 
After walking two or three times along that part of the lane, she was tempted, by the pleasantness of the morning, to stop at the gates and look into the park. The five weeks which she had now passed in Kent had made a great difference in the country, and every day was adding to the verdure of the early trees. She was on the point of continuing her walk, when she caught a glimpse of a gentleman within the sort of grove which edged the park; he was moving that way; and, fearful of its being Mr. Darcy, she was directly retreating. But the person who advanced was now near enough to see her, and stepping forward with eagerness, pronounced her name. She had turned away; but on hearing herself called, though in a voice which proved it to be Mr. Darcy, she moved again towards the gate. He had by that time reached it also, and, holding out a letter, which she instinctively took, said, with a look of haughty composure, "I have been walking in the grove some time in the hope of meeting you. Will you do me the honour of reading that letter?" And then, with a slight bow, turned again into the plantation, and was soon out of sight. 
With no expectation of pleasure, but with the strongest curiosity, Elizabeth opened the letter, and, to her still increasing wonder, perceived an envelope containing two sheets of letter-paper, written quite through, in a very close hand. The envelope itself was likewise full. Pursuing her way along the lane, she then began it. It was dated from Rosings, at eight o'clock in the morning, and was as follows:\97 
"Be not alarmed, madam, on receiving this letter, by the apprehension of its containing any repetition of those sentiments or renewal of those offers which were last night so disgusting to you. I write without any intention of paining you, or humbling myself, by dwelling on wishes which, for the happiness of both, cannot be too soon forgotten; and the effort which the formation and the perusal of this letter must occasion, should have been spared, had not my character required it to be written and read. You must, therefore, pardon the freedom with which I demand your attention; your feelings, I know, will bestow it unwillingly, but I demand it of your justice. 
"Two offenses of a very different nature, and by no means of equal magnitude, you last night laid to my charge. The first mentioned was, that, regardless of the sentiments of either, I had detached Mr. Bingley from your sister, and the other, that I had, in defiance of various claims, in defiance of honour and humanity, ruined the immediate prosperity and blasted the prospects of Mr. Wickham. Wilfully and wantonly to have thrown off the companion of my youth, the acknowledged favourite of my father, a young man who had scarcely any other dependence than on our patronage, and who had been brought up to expect its exertion, would be a depravity, to which the separation of two young persons, whose affection could be the growth of only a few weeks, could bear no comparison. But from the severity of that blame which was last night so liberally bestowed, respecting each circumstance, I shall hope to be in the future secured, when the following account of my actions and their motives has been read. If, in the explanation of them, which is due to myself, I am under the necessity of relating feelings which may be offensive to yours, I can only say that I am sorry. The necessity must be obeyed, and further apology would be absurd. 
"I had not been long in Hertfordshire, before I saw, in common with others, that Bingley preferred your elder sister to any other young woman in the country. But it was not till the evening of the dance at Netherfield that I had any apprehension of his feeling a serious attachment. I had often seen him in love before. At that ball, while I had the honour of dancing with you, I was first made acquainted, by Sir William Lucas's accidental information, that Bingley's attentions to your sister had given rise to a general expectation of their marriage. He spoke of it as a certain event, of which the time alone could be undecided. From that moment I observed my friend's behaviour attentively; and I could then perceive that his partiality for Miss Bennet was beyond what I had ever witnessed in him. Your sister I also watched. Her look and manners were open, cheerful, and engaging as ever, but without any symptom of peculiar regard, and I remained convinced from the evening's scrutiny, that though she received his attentions with pleasure, she did not invite them by any participation of sentiment. If YOU have not been mistaken here, I must have been in error. Your superior knowledge of your sister must make the latter probable. If it be so, if I have been misled by such error to inflict pain on her, your resentment has not been unreasonable. But I shall not scruple to assert, that the serenity of your sister's countenance and air was such as might have given the most acute observer a conviction that, however amiable her temper, her heart was not likely to be easily touched. That I was desirous of believing her indifferent is certain\97but I will venture to say that my investigation and decisions are not usually influenced by my hopes or fears. I did not believe her to be indifferent because I wished it; I believed it on impartial conviction, as truly as I wished it in reason. My objections to the marriage were not merely those which I last night acknowledged to have the utmost force of passion to put aside, in my own case; the want of connection could not be so great an evil to my friend as to me. But there were other causes of repugnance; causes which, though still existing, and existing to an equal degree in both instances, I had myself endeavoured to forget, because they were not immediately before me. These causes must be stated, though briefly. The situation of your mother's family, though objectionable, was nothing in comparison to that total want of propriety so frequently, so almost uniformly betrayed by herself, by your three younger sisters, and occasionally even by your father. Pardon me. It pains me to offend you. But amidst your concern for the defects of your nearest relations, and your displeasure at this representation of them, let it give you consolation to consider that, to have conducted yourselves so as to avoid any share of the like censure, is praise no less generally bestowed on you and your elder sister, than it is honourable to the sense and disposition of both. I will only say farther that from what passed that evening, my opinion of all parties was confirmed, and every inducement heightened which could have led me before, to preserve my friend from what I esteemed a most unhappy connection. He left Netherfield for London, on the day following, as you, I am certain, remember, with the design of soon returning. 
"The part which I acted is now to be explained. His sisters' uneasiness had been equally excited with my own; our coincidence of feeling was soon discovered, and, alike sensible that no time was to be lost in detaching their brother, we shortly resolved on joining him directly in London. We accordingly went\97and there I readily engaged in the office of pointing out to my friend the certain evils of such a choice. I described, and enforced them earnestly. But, however this remonstrance might have staggered or delayed his determination, I do not suppose that it would ultimately have prevented the marriage, had it not been seconded by the assurance that I hesitated not in giving, of your sister's indifference. He had before believed her to return his affection with sincere, if not with equal regard. But Bingley has great natural modesty, with a stronger dependence on my judgement than on his own. To convince him, therefore, that he had deceived himself, was no very difficult point. To persuade him against returning into Hertfordshire, when that conviction had been given, was scarcely the work of a moment. I cannot blame myself for having done thus much. There is but one part of my conduct in the whole affair on which I do not reflect with satisfaction; it is that I condescended to adopt the measures of art so far as to conceal from him your sister's being in town. I knew it myself, as it was known to Miss Bingley; but her brother is even yet ignorant of it. That they might have met without ill consequence is perhaps probable; but his regard did not appear to me enough extinguished for him to see her without some danger. Perhaps this concealment, this disguise was beneath me; it is done, however, and it was done for the best. On this subject I have nothing more to say, no other apology to offer. If I have wounded your sister's feelings, it was unknowingly done and though the motives which governed me may to you very naturally appear insufficient, I have not yet learnt to condemn them. 
"With respect to that other, more weighty accusation, of having injured Mr. Wickham, I can only refute it by laying before you the whole of his connection with my family. Of what he has PARTICULARLY accused me I am ignorant; but of the truth of what I shall relate, I can summon more than one witness of undoubted veracity. 
"Mr. Wickham is the son of a very respectable man, who had for many years the management of all the Pemberley estates, and whose good conduct in the discharge of his trust naturally inclined my father to be of service to him; and on George Wickham, who was his godson, his kindness was therefore liberally bestowed. My father supported him at school, and afterwards at Cambridge\97most important assistance, as his own father, always poor from the extravagance of his wife, would have been unable to give him a gentleman's education. My father was not only fond of this young man's society, whose manner were always engaging; he had also the highest opinion of him, and hoping the church would be his profession, intended to provide for him in it. As for myself, it is many, many years since I first began to think of him in a very different manner. The vicious propensities\97the want of principle, which he was careful to guard from the knowledge of his best friend, could not escape the observation of a young man of nearly the same age with himself, and who had opportunities of seeing him in unguarded moments, which Mr. Darcy could not have. Here again shall give you pain\97to what degree you only can tell. But whatever may be the sentiments which Mr. Wickham has created, a suspicion of their nature shall not prevent me from unfolding his real character\97it adds even another motive. 
"My excellent father died about five years ago; and his attachment to Mr. Wickham was to the last so steady, that in his will he particularly recommended it to me, to promote his advancement in the best manner that his profession might allow\97and if he took orders, desired that a valuable family living might be his as soon as it became vacant. There was also a legacy of one thousand pounds. His own father did not long survive mine, and within half a year from these events, Mr. Wickham wrote to inform me that, having finally resolved against taking orders, he hoped I should not think it unreasonable for him to expect some more immediate pecuniary advantage, in lieu of the preferment, by which he could not be benefited. He had some intention, he added, of studying law, and I must be aware that the interest of one thousand pounds would be a very insufficient support therein. I rather wished, than believed him to be sincere; but, at any rate, was perfectly ready to accede to his proposal. I knew that Mr. Wickham ought not to be a clergyman; the business was therefore soon settled\97he resigned all claim to assistance in the church, were it possible that he could ever be in a situation to receive it, and accepted in return three thousand pounds. All connection between us seemed now dissolved. I thought too ill of him to invite him to Pemberley, or admit his society in town. In town I believe he chiefly lived, but his studying the law was a mere pretence, and being now free from all restraint, his life was a life of idleness and dissipation. For about three years I heard little of him; but on the decease of the incumbent of the living which had been designed for him, he applied to me again by letter for the presentation. His circumstances, he assured me, and I had no difficulty in believing it, were exceedingly bad. He had found the law a most unprofitable study, and was now absolutely resolved on being ordained, if I would present him to the living in question\97of which he trusted there could be little doubt, as he was well assured that I had no other person to provide for, and I could not have forgotten my revered father's intentions. You will hardly blame me for refusing to comply with this entreaty, or for resisting every repetition to it. His resentment was in proportion to the distress of his circumstances\97and he was doubtless as violent in his abuse of me to others as in his reproaches to myself. After this period every appearance of acquaintance was dropped. How he lived I know not. But last summer he was again most painfully obtruded on my notice. 
"I must now mention a circumstance which I would wish to forget myself, and which no obligation less than the present should induce me to unfold to any human being. Having said thus much, I feel no doubt of your secrecy. My sister, who is more than ten years my junior, was left to the guardianship of my mother's nephew, Colonel Fitzwilliam, and myself. About a year ago, she was taken from school, and an establishment formed for her in London; and last summer she went with the lady who presided over it, to Ramsgate; and thither also went Mr. Wickham, undoubtedly by design; for there proved to have been a prior acquaintance between him and Mrs. Younge, in whose character we were most unhappily deceived; and by her connivance and aid, he so far recommended himself to Georgiana, whose affectionate heart retained a strong impression of his kindness to her as a child, that she was persuaded to believe herself in love, and to consent to an elopement. She was then but fifteen, which must be her excuse; and after stating her imprudence, I am happy to add, that I owed the knowledge of it to herself. I joined them unexpectedly a day or two before the intended elopement, and then Georgiana, unable to support the idea of grieving and offending a brother whom she almost looked up to as a father, acknowledged the whole to me. You may imagine what I felt and how I acted. Regard for my sister's credit and feelings prevented any public exposure; but I wrote to Mr. Wickham, who left the place immediately, and Mrs. Younge was of course removed from her charge. Mr. Wickham's chief object was unquestionably my sister's fortune, which is thirty thousand pounds; but I cannot help supposing that the hope of revenging himself on me was a strong inducement. His revenge would have been complete indeed. 
"This, madam, is a faithful narrative of every event in which we have been concerned together; and if you do not absolutely reject it as false, you will, I hope, acquit me henceforth of cruelty towards Mr. Wickham. I know not in what manner, under what form of falsehood he had imposed on you; but his success is not perhaps to be wondered at. Ignorant as you previously were of everything concerning either, detection could not be in your power, and suspicion certainly not in your inclination. 
"You may possibly wonder why all this was not told you last night; but I was not then master enough of myself to know what could or ought to be revealed. For the truth of everything here related, I can appeal more particularly to the testimony of Colonel Fitzwilliam, who, from our near relationship and constant intimacy, and, still more, as one of the executors of my father's will, has been unavoidably acquainted with every particular of these transactions. If your abhorrence of ME should make MY assertions valueless, you cannot be prevented by the same cause from confiding in my cousin; and that there may be the possibility of consulting him, I shall endeavour to find some opportunity of putting this letter in your hands in the course of the morning. I will only add, God bless you, 
"FITZWILLIAM DARCY" 
Chapter 36
If Elizabeth, when Mr. Darcy gave her the letter, did not expect it to contain a renewal of his offers, she had formed no expectation at all of its contents. But such as they were, it may well be supposed how eagerly she went through them, and what a contrariety of emotion they excited. Her feelings as she read were scarcely to be defined. With amazement did she first understand that he believed any apology to be in his power; and steadfastly was she persuaded, that he could have no explanation to give, which a just sense of shame would not conceal. With a strong prejudice against everything he might say, she began his account of what had happened at Netherfield. She read with an eagerness which hardly left her power of comprehension, and from impatience of knowing what the next sentence might bring, was incapable of attending to the sense of the one before her eyes. His belief of her sister's insensibility she instantly resolved to be false; and his account of the real, the worst objections to the match, made her too angry to have any wish of doing him justice. He expressed no regret for what he had done which satisfied her; his style was not penitent, but haughty. It was all pride and insolence. 
But when this subject was succeeded by his account of Mr. Wickham\97when she read with somewhat clearer attention a relation of events which, if true, must overthrow every cherished opinion of his worth, and which bore so alarming an affinity to his own history of himself\97her feelings were yet more acutely painful and more difficult of definition. Astonishment, apprehension, and even horror, oppressed her. She wished to discredit it entirely, repeatedly exclaiming, "This must be false! This cannot be! This must be the grossest falsehood!"\97and when she had gone through the whole letter, though scarcely knowing anything of the last page or two, put it hastily away, protesting that she would not regard it, that she would never look in it again. 
In this perturbed state of mind, with thoughts that could rest on nothing, she walked on; but it would not do; in half a minute the letter was unfolded again, and collecting herself as well as she could, she again began the mortifying perusal of all that related to Wickham, and commanded herself so far as to examine the meaning of every sentence. The account of his connection with the Pemberley family was exactly what he had related himself; and the kindness of the late Mr. Darcy, though she had not before known its extent, agreed equally well with his own words. So far each recital confirmed the other; but when she came to the will, the difference was great. What Wickham had said of the living was fresh in her memory, and as she recalled his very words, it was impossible not to feel that there was gross duplicity on one side or the other; and, for a few moments, she flattered herself that her wishes did not err. But when she read and re-read with the closest attention, the particulars immediately following of Wickham's resigning all pretensions to the living, of his receiving in lieu so considerable a sum as three thousand pounds, again was she forced to hesitate. She put down the letter, weighed every circumstance with what she meant to be impartiality\97deliberated on the probability of each statement\97but with little success. On both sides it was only assertion. Again she read on; but every line proved more clearly that the affair, which she had believed it impossible that any contrivance could so represent as to render Mr. Darcy's conduct in it less than infamous, was capable of a turn which must make him entirely blameless throughout the whole. 
The extravagance and general profligacy which he scrupled not to lay at Mr. Wickham's charge, exceedingly shocked her; the more so, as she could bring no proof of its injustice. She had never heard of him before his entrance into the \97\97shire Militia, in which he had engaged at the persuasion of the young man who, on meeting him accidentally in town, had there renewed a slight acquaintance. Of his former way of life nothing had been known in Hertfordshire but what he told himself. As to his real character, had information been in her power, she had never felt a wish of inquiring. His countenance, voice, and manner had established him at once in the possession of every virtue. She tried to recollect some instance of goodness, some distinguished trait of integrity or benevolence, that might rescue him from the attacks of Mr. Darcy; or at least, by the predominance of virtue, atone for those casual errors under which she would endeavour to class what Mr. Darcy had described as the idleness and vice of many years' continuance. But no such recollection befriended her. She could see him instantly before her, in every charm of air and address; but she could remember no more substantial good than the general approbation of the neighbourhood, and the regard which his social powers had gained him in the mess. After pausing on this point a considerable while, she once more continued to read. But, alas! the story which followed, of his designs on Miss Darcy, received some confirmation from what had passed between Colonel Fitzwilliam and herself only the morning before; and at last she was referred for the truth of every particular to Colonel Fitzwilliam himself\97from whom she had previously received the information of his near concern in all his cousin's affairs, and whose character she had no reason to question. At one time she had almost resolved on applying to him, but the idea was checked by the awkwardness of the application, and at length wholly banished by the conviction that Mr. Darcy would never have hazarded such a proposal, if he had not been well assured of his cousin's corroboration. 
She perfectly remembered everything that had passed in conversation between Wickham and herself, in their first evening at Mr. Phillips's. Many of his expressions were still fresh in her memory. She was NOW struck with the impropriety of such communications to a stranger, and wondered it had escaped her before. She saw the indelicacy of putting himself forward as he had done, and the inconsistency of his professions with his conduct. She remembered that he had boasted of having no fear of seeing Mr. Darcy\97that Mr. Darcy might leave the country, but that HE should stand his ground; yet he had avoided the Netherfield ball the very next week. She remembered also that, till the Netherfield family had quitted the country, he had told his story to no one but herself; but that after their removal it had been everywhere discussed; that he had then no reserves, no scruples in sinking Mr. Darcy's character, though he had assured her that respect for the father would always prevent his exposing the son. 
How differently did everything now appear in which he was concerned! His attentions to Miss King were now the consequence of views solely and hatefully mercenary; and the mediocrity of her fortune proved no longer the moderation of his wishes, but his eagerness to grasp at anything. His behaviour to herself could now have had no tolerable motive; he had either been deceived with regard to her fortune, or had been gratifying his vanity by encouraging the preference which she believed she had most incautiously shown. Every lingering struggle in his favour grew fainter and fainter; and in farther justification of Mr. Darcy, she could not but allow Mr. Bingley, when questioned by Jane, had long ago asserted his blamelessness in the affair; that proud and repulsive as were his manners, she had never, in the whole course of their acquaintance\97an acquaintance which had latterly brought them much together, and given her a sort of intimacy with his ways\97seen anything that betrayed him to be unprincipled or unjust\97anything that spoke him of irreligious or immoral habits; that among his own connections he was esteemed and valued\97that even Wickham had allowed him merit as a brother, and that she had often heard him speak so affectionately of his sister as to prove him capable of SOME amiable feeling; that had his actions been what Mr. Wickham represented them, so gross a violation of everything right could hardly have been concealed from the world; and that friendship between a person capable of it, and such an amiable man as Mr. Bingley, was incomprehensible. 
She grew absolutely ashamed of herself. Of neither Darcy nor Wickham could she think without feeling she had been blind, partial, prejudiced, absurd. 
"How despicably I have acted!" she cried; "I, who have prided myself on my discernment! I, who have valued myself on my abilities! who have often disdained the generous candour of my sister, and gratified my vanity in useless or blameable mistrust! How humiliating is this discovery! Yet, how just a humiliation! Had I been in love, I could not have been more wretchedly blind! But vanity, not love, has been my folly. Pleased with the preference of one, and offended by the neglect of the other, on the very beginning of our acquaintance, I have courted prepossession and ignorance, and driven reason away, where either were concerned. Till this moment I never knew myself." 
From herself to Jane\97from Jane to Bingley, her thoughts were in a line which soon brought to her recollection that Mr. Darcy's explanation THERE had appeared very insufficient, and she read it again. Widely different was the effect of a second perusal. How could she deny that credit to his assertions in one instance, which she had been obliged to give in the other? He declared himself to be totally unsuspicious of her sister's attachment; and she could not help remembering what Charlotte's opinion had always been. Neither could she deny the justice of his description of Jane. She felt that Jane's feelings, though fervent, were little displayed, and that there was a constant complacency in her air and manner not often united with great sensibility. 
When she came to that part of the letter in which her family were mentioned in terms of such mortifying, yet merited reproach, her sense of shame was severe. The justice of the charge struck her too forcibly for denial, and the circumstances to which he particularly alluded as having passed at the Netherfield ball, and as confirming all his first disapprobation, could not have made a stronger impression on his mind than on hers. 
The compliment to herself and her sister was not unfelt. It soothed, but it could not console her for the contempt which had thus been self-attracted by the rest of her family; and as she considered that Jane's disappointment had in fact been the work of her nearest relations, and reflected how materially the credit of both must be hurt by such impropriety of conduct, she felt depressed beyond anything she had ever known before. 
After wandering along the lane for two hours, giving way to every variety of thought\97re-considering events, determining probabilities, and reconciling herself, as well as she could, to a change so sudden and so important, fatigue, and a recollection of her long absence, made her at length return home; and she entered the house with the wish of appearing cheerful as usual, and the resolution of repressing such reflections as must make her unfit for conversation. 
She was immediately told that the two gentlemen from Rosings had each called during her absence; Mr. Darcy, only for a few minutes, to take leave\97but that Colonel Fitzwilliam had been sitting with them at least an hour, hoping for her return, and almost resolving to walk after her till she could be found. Elizabeth could but just AFFECT concern in missing him; she really rejoiced at it. Colonel Fitzwilliam was no longer an object; she could think only of her letter. 
Chapter 37
The two gentlemen left Rosings the next morning, and Mr. Collins having been in waiting near the lodges, to make them his parting obeisance, was able to bring home the pleasing intelligence, of their appearing in very good health, and in as tolerable spirits as could be expected, after the melancholy scene so lately gone through at Rosings. To Rosings he then hastened, to console Lady Catherine and her daughter; and on his return brought back, with great satisfaction, a message from her ladyship, importing that she felt herself so dull as to make her very desirous of having them all to dine with her. 
Elizabeth could not see Lady Catherine without recollecting that, had she chosen it, she might by this time have been presented to her as her future niece; nor could she think, without a smile, of what her ladyship's indignation would have been. "What would she have said? how would she have behaved?" were questions with which she amused herself. 
Their first subject was the diminution of the Rosings party. "I assure you, I feel it exceedingly," said Lady Catherine; "I believe no one feels the loss of friends so much as I do. But I am particularly attached to these young men, and know them to be so much attached to me! They were excessively sorry to go! But so they always are. The dear Colonel rallied his spirits tolerably till just at last; but Darcy seemed to feel it most acutely, more, I think, than last year. His attachment to Rosings certainly increases." 
Mr. Collins had a compliment, and an allusion to throw in here, which were kindly smiled on by the mother and daughter. 
Lady Catherine observed, after dinner, that Miss Bennet seemed out of spirits, and immediately accounting for it by herself, by supposing that she did not like to go home again so soon, she added: 
"But if that is the case, you must write to your mother and beg that you may stay a little longer. Mrs. Collins will be very glad of your company, I am sure." 
"I am much obliged to your ladyship for your kind invitation," replied Elizabeth, "but it is not in my power to accept it. I must be in town next Saturday." 
"Why, at that rate, you will have been here only six weeks. I expected you to stay two months. I told Mrs. Collins so before you came. There can be no occasion for your going so soon. Mrs. Bennet could certainly spare you for another fortnight." 
"But my father cannot. He wrote last week to hurry my return." 
"Oh! your father of course may spare you, if your mother can. Daughters are never of so much consequence to a father. And if you will stay another MONTH complete, it will be in my power to take one of you as far as London, for I am going there early in June, for a week; and as Dawson does not object to the barouche-box, there will be very good room for one of you\97and indeed, if the weather should happen to be cool, I should not object to taking you both, as you are neither of you large." 
"You are all kindness, madam; but I believe we must abide by our original plan." 
Lady Catherine seemed resigned. "Mrs. Collins, you must send a servant with them. You know I always speak my mind, and I cannot bear the idea of two young women travelling post by themselves. It is highly improper. You must contrive to send somebody. I have the greatest dislike in the world to that sort of thing. Young women should always be properly guarded and attended, according to their situation in life. When my niece Georgiana went to Ramsgate last summer, I made a point of her having two men-servants go with her. Miss Darcy, the daughter of Mr. Darcy, of Pemberley, and Lady Anne, could not have appeared with propriety in a different manner. I am excessively attentive to all those things. You must send John with the young ladies, Mrs. Collins. I am glad it occurred to me to mention it; for it would really be discreditable to YOU to let them go alone." 
"My uncle is to send a servant for us." 
"Oh! Your uncle! He keeps a man-servant, does he? I am very glad you have somebody who thinks of these things. Where shall you change horses? Oh! Bromley, of course. If you mention my name at the Bell, you will be attended to." 
Lady Catherine had many other questions to ask respecting their journey, and as she did not answer them all herself, attention was necessary, which Elizabeth believed to be lucky for her; or, with a mind so occupied, she might have forgotten where she was. Reflection must be reserved for solitary hours; whenever she was alone, she gave way to it as the greatest relief; and not a day went by without a solitary walk, in which she might indulge in all the delight of unpleasant recollections. 
Mr. Darcy's letter she was in a fair way of soon knowing by heart. She studied every sentence; and her feelings towards its writer were at times widely different. When she remembered the style of his address, she was still full of indignation; but when she considered how unjustly she had condemned and upbraided him, her anger was turned against herself; and his disappointed feelings became the object of compassion. His attachment excited gratitude, his general character respect; but she could not approve him; nor could she for a moment repent her refusal, or feel the slightest inclination ever to see him again. In her own past behaviour, there was a constant source of vexation and regret; and in the unhappy defects of her family, a subject of yet heavier chagrin. They were hopeless of remedy. Her father, contented with laughing at them, would never exert himself to restrain the wild giddiness of his youngest daughters; and her mother, with manners so far from right herself, was entirely insensible of the evil. Elizabeth had frequently united with Jane in an endeavour to check the imprudence of Catherine and Lydia; but while they were supported by their mother's indulgence, what chance could there be of improvement? Catherine, weak-spirited, irritable, and completely under Lydia's guidance, had been always affronted by their advice; and Lydia, self-willed and careless, would scarcely give them a hearing. They were ignorant, idle, and vain. While there was an officer in Meryton, they would flirt with him; and while Meryton was within a walk of Longbourn, they would be going there forever. 
Anxiety on Jane's behalf was another prevailing concern; and Mr. Darcy's explanation, by restoring Bingley to all her former good opinion, heightened the sense of what Jane had lost. His affection was proved to have been sincere, and his conduct cleared of all blame, unless any could attach to the implicitness of his confidence in his friend. How grievous then was the thought that, of a situation so desirable in every respect, so replete with advantage, so promising for happiness, Jane had been deprived, by the folly and indecorum of her own family! 
When to these recollections was added the developement of Wickham's character, it may be easily believed that the happy spirits which had seldom been depressed before, were now so much affected as to make it almost impossible for her to appear tolerably cheerful. 
Their engagements at Rosings were as frequent during the last week of her stay as they had been at first. The very last evening was spent there; and her ladyship again inquired minutely into the particulars of their journey, gave them directions as to the best method of packing, and was so urgent on the necessity of placing gowns in the only right way, that Maria thought herself obliged, on her return, to undo all the work of the morning, and pack her trunk afresh. 
When they parted, Lady Catherine, with great condescension, wished them a good journey, and invited them to come to Hunsford again next year; and Miss de Bourgh exerted herself so far as to curtsey and hold out her hand to both. 
Chapter 38
On Saturday morning Elizabeth and Mr. Collins met for breakfast a few minutes before the others appeared; and he took the opportunity of paying the parting civilities which he deemed indispensably necessary. 
"I know not, Miss Elizabeth," said he, "whether Mrs. Collins has yet expressed her sense of your kindness in coming to us; but I am very certain you will not leave the house without receiving her thanks for it. The favor of your company has been much felt, I assure you. We know how little there is to tempt anyone to our humble abode. Our plain manner of living, our small rooms and few domestics, and the little we see of the world, must make Hunsford extremely dull to a young lady like yourself; but I hope you will believe us grateful for the condescension, and that we have done everything in our power to prevent your spending your time unpleasantly." 
Elizabeth was eager with her thanks and assurances of happiness. She had spent six weeks with great enjoyment; and the pleasure of being with Charlotte, and the kind attentions she had received, must make HER feel the obliged. Mr. Collins was gratified, and with a more smiling solemnity replied: 
"It gives me great pleasure to hear that you have passed your time not disagreeably. We have certainly done our best; and most fortunately having it in our power to introduce you to very superior society, and, from our connection with Rosings, the frequent means of varying the humble home scene, I think we may flatter ourselves that your Hunsford visit cannot have been entirely irksome. Our situation with regard to Lady Catherine's family is indeed the sort of extraordinary advantage and blessing which few can boast. You see on what a footing we are. You see how continually we are engaged there. In truth I must acknowledge that, with all the disadvantages of this humble parsonage, I should not think anyone abiding in it an object of compassion, while they are sharers of our intimacy at Rosings." 
Words were insufficient for the elevation of his feelings; and he was obliged to walk about the room, while Elizabeth tried to unite civility and truth in a few short sentences. 
"You may, in fact, carry a very favourable report of us into Hertfordshire, my dear cousin. I flatter myself at least that you will be able to do so. Lady Catherine's great attentions to Mrs. Collins you have been a daily witness of; and altogether I trust it does not appear that your friend has drawn an unfortunate\97but on this point it will be as well to be silent. Only let me assure you, my dear Miss Elizabeth, that I can from my heart most cordially wish you equal felicity in marriage. My dear Charlotte and I have but one mind and one way of thinking. There is in everything a most remarkable resemblance of character and ideas between us. We seem to have been designed for each other." 
Elizabeth could safely say that it was a great happiness where that was the case, and with equal sincerity could add, that she firmly believed and rejoiced in his domestic comforts. She was not sorry, however, to have the recital of them interrupted by the lady from whom they sprang. Poor Charlotte! it was melancholy to leave her to such society! But she had chosen it with her eyes open; and though evidently regretting that her visitors were to go, she did not seem to ask for compassion. Her home and her housekeeping, her parish and her poultry, and all their dependent concerns, had not yet lost their charms. 
At length the chaise arrived, the trunks were fastened on, the parcels placed within, and it was pronounced to be ready. After an affectionate parting between the friends, Elizabeth was attended to the carriage by Mr. Collins, and as they walked down the garden he was commissioning her with his best respects to all her family, not forgetting his thanks for the kindness he had received at Longbourn in the winter, and his compliments to Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner, though unknown. He then handed her in, Maria followed, and the door was on the point of being closed, when he suddenly reminded them, with some consternation, that they had hitherto forgotten to leave any message for the ladies at Rosings. 
"But," he added, "you will of course wish to have your humble respects delivered to them, with your grateful thanks for their kindness to you while you have been here." 
Elizabeth made no objection; the door was then allowed to be shut, and the carriage drove off. 
"Good gracious!" cried Maria, after a few minutes' silence, "it seems but a day or two since we first came! and yet how many things have happened!" 
"A great many indeed," said her companion with a sigh. 
"We have dined nine times at Rosings, besides drinking tea there twice! How much I shall have to tell!" 
Elizabeth added privately, "And how much I shall have to conceal!" 
Their journey was performed without much conversation, or any alarm; and within four hours of their leaving Hunsford they reached Mr. Gardiner's house, where they were to remain a few days. 
Jane looked well, and Elizabeth had little opportunity of studying her spirits, amidst the various engagements which the kindness of her aunt had reserved for them. But Jane was to go home with her, and at Longbourn there would be leisure enough for observation. 
It was not without an effort, meanwhile, that she could wait even for Longbourn, before she told her sister of Mr. Darcy's proposals. To know that she had the power of revealing what would so exceedingly astonish Jane, and must, at the same time, so highly gratify whatever of her own vanity she had not yet been able to reason away, was such a temptation to openness as nothing could have conquered but the state of indecision in which she remained as to the extent of what she should communicate; and her fear, if she once entered on the subject, of being hurried into repeating something of Bingley which might only grieve her sister further. 
Chapter 39
It was the second week in May, in which the three young ladies set out together from Gracechurch Street for the town of \97\97, in Hertfordshire; and, as they drew near the appointed inn where Mr. Bennet's carriage was to meet them, they quickly perceived, in token of the coachman's punctuality, both Kitty and Lydia looking out of a dining-room upstairs. These two girls had been above an hour in the place, happily employed in visiting an opposite milliner, watching the sentinel on guard, and dressing a salad and cucumber. 
After welcoming their sisters, they triumphantly displayed a table set out with such cold meat as an inn larder usually affords, exclaiming, "Is not this nice? Is not this an agreeable surprise?" 
"And we mean to treat you all," added Lydia, "but you must lend us the money, for we have just spent ours at the shop out there." Then, showing her purchases\97"Look here, I have bought this bonnet. I do not think it is very pretty; but I thought I might as well buy it as not. I shall pull it to pieces as soon as I get home, and see if I can make it up any better." 
And when her sisters abused it as ugly, she added, with perfect unconcern, "Oh! but there were two or three much uglier in the shop; and when I have bought some prettier-coloured satin to trim it with fresh, I think it will be very tolerable. Besides, it will not much signify what one wears this summer, after the \97\97shire have left Meryton, and they are going in a fortnight." 
"Are they indeed!" cried Elizabeth, with the greatest satisfaction. 
"They are going to be encamped near Brighton; and I do so want papa to take us all there for the summer! It would be such a delicious scheme; and I dare say would hardly cost anything at all. Mamma would like to go too of all things! Only think what a miserable summer else we shall have!" 
"Yes," thought Elizabeth, "THAT would be a delightful scheme indeed, and completely do for us at once. Good Heaven! Brighton, and a whole campful of soldiers, to us, who have been overset already by one poor regiment of militia, and the monthly balls of Meryton!" 
"Now I have got some news for you," said Lydia, as they sat down at table. "What do you think? It is excellent news\97capital news\97and about a certain person we all like!" 
Jane and Elizabeth looked at each other, and the waiter was told he need not stay. Lydia laughed, and said: 
"Aye, that is just like your formality and discretion. You thought the waiter must not hear, as if he cared! I dare say he often hears worse things said than I am going to say. But he is an ugly fellow! I am glad he is gone. I never saw such a long chin in my life. Well, but now for my news; it is about dear Wickham; too good for the waiter, is it not? There is no danger of Wickham's marrying Mary King. There's for you! She is gone down to her uncle at Liverpool: gone to stay. Wickham is safe." 
"And Mary King is safe!" added Elizabeth; "safe from a connection imprudent as to fortune." 
"She is a great fool for going away, if she liked him." 
"But I hope there is no strong attachment on either side," said Jane. 
"I am sure there is not on HIS. I will answer for it, he never cared three straws about her\97who could about such a nasty little freckled thing?" 
Elizabeth was shocked to think that, however incapable of such coarseness of EXPRESSION herself, the coarseness of the SENTIMENT was little other than her own breast had harboured and fancied liberal! 
As soon as all had ate, and the elder ones paid, the carriage was ordered; and after some contrivance, the whole party, with all their boxes, work-bags, and parcels, and the unwelcome addition of Kitty's and Lydia's purchases, were seated in it. 
"How nicely we are all crammed in," cried Lydia. "I am glad I bought my bonnet, if it is only for the fun of having another bandbox! Well, now let us be quite comfortable and snug, and talk and laugh all the way home. And in the first place, let us hear what has happened to you all since you went away. Have you seen any pleasant men? Have you had any flirting? I was in great hopes that one of you would have got a husband before you came back. Jane will be quite an old maid soon, I declare. She is almost three-and-twenty! Lord, how ashamed I should be of not being married before three-and-twenty! My aunt Phillips wants you so to get husbands, you can't think. She says Lizzy had better have taken Mr. Collins; but I do not think there would have been any fun in it. Lord! how I should like to be married before any of you; and then I would chaperon you about to all the balls. Dear me! we had such a good piece of fun the other day at Colonel Forster's. Kitty and me were to spend the day there, and Mrs. Forster promised to have a little dance in the evening; (by the bye, Mrs. Forster and me are SUCH friends!) and so she asked the two Harringtons to come, but Harriet was ill, and so Pen was forced to come by herself; and then, what do you think we did? We dressed up Chamberlayne in woman's clothes on purpose to pass for a lady, only think what fun! Not a soul knew of it, but Colonel and Mrs. Forster, and Kitty and me, except my aunt, for we were forced to borrow one of her gowns; and you cannot imagine how well he looked! When Denny, and Wickham, and Pratt, and two or three more of the men came in, they did not know him in the least. Lord! how I laughed! and so did Mrs. Forster. I thought I should have died. And THAT made the men suspect something, and then they soon found out what was the matter." 
With such kinds of histories of their parties and good jokes, did Lydia, assisted by Kitty's hints and additions, endeavour to amuse her companions all the way to Longbourn. Elizabeth listened as little as she could, but there was no escaping the frequent mention of Wickham's name. 
Their reception at home was most kind. Mrs. Bennet rejoiced to see Jane in undiminished beauty; and more than once during dinner did Mr. Bennet say voluntarily to Elizabeth: 
"I am glad you are come back, Lizzy." 
Their party in the dining-room was large, for almost all the Lucases came to meet Maria and hear the news; and various were the subjects that occupied them: Lady Lucas was inquiring of Maria, after the welfare and poultry of her eldest daughter; Mrs. Bennet was doubly engaged, on one hand collecting an account of the present fashions from Jane, who sat some way below her, and, on the other, retailing them all to the younger Lucases; and Lydia, in a voice rather louder than any other person's, was enumerating the various pleasures of the morning to anybody who would hear her. 
"Oh! Mary," said she, "I wish you had gone with us, for we had such fun! As we went along, Kitty and I drew up the blinds, and pretended there was nobody in the coach; and I should have gone so all the way, if Kitty had not been sick; and when we got to the George, I do think we behaved very handsomely, for we treated the other three with the nicest cold luncheon in the world, and if you would have gone, we would have treated you too. And then when we came away it was such fun! I thought we never should have got into the coach. I was ready to die of laughter. And then we were so merry all the way home! we talked and laughed so loud, that anybody might have heard us ten miles off!" 
To this Mary very gravely replied, "Far be it from me, my dear sister, to depreciate such pleasures! They would doubtless be congenial with the generality of female minds. But I confess they would have no charms for ME\97I should infinitely prefer a book." 
But of this answer Lydia heard not a word. She seldom listened to anybody for more than half a minute, and never attended to Mary at all. 
In the afternoon Lydia was urgent with the rest of the girls to walk to Meryton, and to see how everybody went on; but Elizabeth steadily opposed the scheme. It should not be said that the Miss Bennets could not be at home half a day before they were in pursuit of the officers. There was another reason too for her opposition. She dreaded seeing Mr. Wickham again, and was resolved to avoid it as long as possible. The comfort to HER of the regiment's approaching removal was indeed beyond expression. In a fortnight they were to go\97and once gone, she hoped there could be nothing more to plague her on his account. 
She had not been many hours at home before she found that the Brighton scheme, of which Lydia had given them a hint at the inn, was under frequent discussion between her parents. Elizabeth saw directly that her father had not the smallest intention of yielding; but his answers were at the same time so vague and equivocal, that her mother, though often disheartened, had never yet despaired of succeeding at last. 
Chapter 40
Elizabeth's impatience to acquaint Jane with what had happened could no longer be overcome; and at length, resolving to suppress every particular in which her sister was concerned, and preparing her to be surprised, she related to her the next morning the chief of the scene between Mr. Darcy and herself. 
Miss Bennet's astonishment was soon lessened by the strong sisterly partiality which made any admiration of Elizabeth appear perfectly natural; and all surprise was shortly lost in other feelings. She was sorry that Mr. Darcy should have delivered his sentiments in a manner so little suited to recommend them; but still more was she grieved for the unhappiness which her sister's refusal must have given him. 
"His being so sure of succeeding was wrong," said she, "and certainly ought not to have appeared; but consider how much it must increase his disappointment!" 
"Indeed," replied Elizabeth, "I am heartily sorry for him; but he has other feelings, which will probably soon drive away his regard for me. You do not blame me, however, for refusing him?" 
"Blame you! Oh, no." 
"But you blame me for having spoken so warmly of Wickham?" 
"No\97I do not know that you were wrong in saying what you did." 
"But you WILL know it, when I tell you what happened the very next day." 
She then spoke of the letter, repeating the whole of its contents as far as they concerned George Wickham. What a stroke was this for poor Jane! who would willingly have gone through the world without believing that so much wickedness existed in the whole race of mankind, as was here collected in one individual. Nor was Darcy's vindication, though grateful to her feelings, capable of consoling her for such discovery. Most earnestly did she labour to prove the probability of error, and seek to clear the one without involving the other. 
"This will not do," said Elizabeth; "you never will be able to make both of them good for anything. Take your choice, but you must be satisfied with only one. There is but such a quantity of merit between them; just enough to make one good sort of man; and of late it has been shifting about pretty much. For my part, I am inclined to believe it all Darcy's; but you shall do as you choose." 
It was some time, however, before a smile could be extorted from Jane. 
"I do not know when I have been more shocked," said she. "Wickham so very bad! It is almost past belief. And poor Mr. Darcy! Dear Lizzy, only consider what he must have suffered. Such a disappointment! and with the knowledge of your ill opinion, too! and having to relate such a thing of his sister! It is really too distressing. I am sure you must feel it so." 
"Oh! no, my regret and compassion are all done away by seeing you so full of both. I know you will do him such ample justice, that I am growing every moment more unconcerned and indifferent. Your profusion makes me saving; and if you lament over him much longer, my heart will be as light as a feather." 
"Poor Wickham! there is such an expression of goodness in his countenance! such an openness and gentleness in his manner!" 
"There certainly was some great mismanagement in the education of those two young men. One has got all the goodness, and the other all the appearance of it." 
"I never thought Mr. Darcy so deficient in the APPEARANCE of it as you used to do." 
"And yet I meant to be uncommonly clever in taking so decided a dislike to him, without any reason. It is such a spur to one's genius, such an opening for wit, to have a dislike of that kind. One may be continually abusive without saying anything just; but one cannot always be laughing at a man without now and then stumbling on something witty." 
"Lizzy, when you first read that letter, I am sure you could not treat the matter as you do now." 
"Indeed, I could not. I was uncomfortable enough, I may say unhappy. And with no one to speak to about what I felt, no Jane to comfort me and say that I had not been so very weak and vain and nonsensical as I knew I had! Oh! how I wanted you!" 
"How unfortunate that you should have used such very strong expressions in speaking of Wickham to Mr. Darcy, for now they DO appear wholly undeserved." 
"Certainly. But the misfortune of speaking with bitterness is a most natural consequence of the prejudices I had been encouraging. There is one point on which I want your advice. I want to be told whether I ought, or ought not, to make our acquaintances in general understand Wickham's character." 
Miss Bennet paused a little, and then replied, "Surely there can be no occasion for exposing him so dreadfully. What is your opinion?" 
"That it ought not to be attempted. Mr. Darcy has not authorised me to make his communication public. On the contrary, every particular relative to his sister was meant to be kept as much as possible to myself; and if I endeavour to undeceive people as to the rest of his conduct, who will believe me? The general prejudice against Mr. Darcy is so violent, that it would be the death of half the good people in Meryton to attempt to place him in an amiable light. I am not equal to it. Wickham will soon be gone; and therefore it will not signify to anyone here what he really is. Some time hence it will be all found out, and then we may laugh at their stupidity in not knowing it before. At present I will say nothing about it." 
"You are quite right. To have his errors made public might ruin him for ever. He is now, perhaps, sorry for what he has done, and anxious to re-establish a character. We must not make him desperate." 
The tumult of Elizabeth's mind was allayed by this conversation. She had got rid of two of the secrets which had weighed on her for a fortnight, and was certain of a willing listener in Jane, whenever she might wish to talk again of either. But there was still something lurking behind, of which prudence forbade the disclosure. She dared not relate the other half of Mr. Darcy's letter, nor explain to her sister how sincerely she had been valued by her friend. Here was knowledge in which no one could partake; and she was sensible that nothing less than a perfect understanding between the parties could justify her in throwing off this last encumbrance of mystery. "And then," said she, "if that very improbable event should ever take place, I shall merely be able to tell what Bingley may tell in a much more agreeable manner himself. The liberty of communication cannot be mine till it has lost all its value!" 
She was now, on being settled at home, at leisure to observe the real state of her sister's spirits. Jane was not happy. She still cherished a very tender affection for Bingley. Having never even fancied herself in love before, her regard had all the warmth of first attachment, and, from her age and disposition, greater steadiness than most first attachments often boast; and so fervently did she value his remembrance, and prefer him to every other man, that all her good sense, and all her attention to the feelings of her friends, were requisite to check the indulgence of those regrets which must have been injurious to her own health and their tranquillity. 
"Well, Lizzy," said Mrs. Bennet one day, "what is your opinion NOW of this sad business of Jane's? For my part, I am determined never to speak of it again to anybody. I told my sister Phillips so the other day. But I cannot find out that Jane saw anything of him in London. Well, he is a very undeserving young man\97and I do not suppose there's the least chance in the world of her ever getting him now. There is no talk of his coming to Netherfield again in the summer; and I have inquired of everybody, too, who is likely to know." 
"I do not believe he will ever live at Netherfield any more." 
"Oh well! it is just as he chooses. Nobody wants him to come. Though I shall always say he used my daughter extremely ill; and if I was her, I would not have put up with it. Well, my comfort is, I am sure Jane will die of a broken heart; and then he will be sorry for what he has done." 
But as Elizabeth could not receive comfort from any such expectation, she made no answer. 
"Well, Lizzy," continued her mother, soon afterwards, "and so the Collinses live very comfortable, do they? Well, well, I only hope it will last. And what sort of table do they keep? Charlotte is an excellent manager, I dare say. If she is half as sharp as her mother, she is saving enough. There is nothing extravagant in THEIR housekeeping, I dare say." 
"No, nothing at all." 
"A great deal of good management, depend upon it. Yes, yes. THEY will take care not to outrun their income. THEY will never be distressed for money. Well, much good may it do them! And so, I suppose, they often talk of having Longbourn when your father is dead. They look upon it as quite their own, I dare say, whenever that happens." 
"It was a subject which they could not mention before me." 
"No; it would have been strange if they had; but I make no doubt they often talk of it between themselves. Well, if they can be easy with an estate that is not lawfully their own, so much the better. I should be ashamed of having one that was only entailed on me." 
Chapter 41
The first week of their return was soon gone. The second began. It was the last of the regiment's stay in Meryton, and all the young ladies in the neighbourhood were drooping apace. The dejection was almost universal. The elder Miss Bennets alone were still able to eat, drink, and sleep, and pursue the usual course of their employments. Very frequently were they reproached for this insensibility by Kitty and Lydia, whose own misery was extreme, and who could not comprehend such hard-heartedness in any of the family. 
"Good Heaven! what is to become of us? What are we to do?" would they often exclaiming the bitterness of woe. "How can you be smiling so, Lizzy?" 
Their affectionate mother shared all their grief; she remembered what she had herself endured on a similar occasion, five-and-twenty years ago. 
"I am sure," said she, "I cried for two days together when Colonel Miller's regiment went away. I thought I should have broken my heart." 
"I am sure I shall break MINE," said Lydia. 
"If one could but go to Brighton!" observed Mrs. Bennet. 
"Oh, yes!\97if one could but go to Brighton! But papa is so disagreeable." 
"A little sea-bathing would set me up forever." 
"And my aunt Phillips is sure it would do ME a great deal of good," added Kitty. 
Such were the kind of lamentations resounding perpetually through Longbourn House. Elizabeth tried to be diverted by them; but all sense of pleasure was lost in shame. She felt anew the justice of Mr. Darcy's objections; and never had she been so much disposed to pardon his interference in the views of his friend. 
But the gloom of Lydia's prospect was shortly cleared away; for she received an invitation from Mrs. Forster, the wife of the colonel of the regiment, to accompany her to Brighton. This invaluable friend was a very young woman, and very lately married. A resemblance in good humour and good spirits had recommended her and Lydia to each other, and out of their THREE months' acquaintance they had been intimate TWO. 
The rapture of Lydia on this occasion, her adoration of Mrs. Forster, the delight of Mrs. Bennet, and the mortification of Kitty, are scarcely to be described. Wholly inattentive to her sister's feelings, Lydia flew about the house in restless ecstasy, calling for everyone's congratulations, and laughing and talking with more violence than ever; whilst the luckless Kitty continued in the parlour repined at her fate in terms as unreasonable as her accent was peevish. 
"I cannot see why Mrs. Forster should not ask ME as well as Lydia," said she, "Though I am NOT her particular friend. I have just as much right to be asked as she has, and more too, for I am two years older." 
In vain did Elizabeth attempt to make her reasonable, and Jane to make her resigned. As for Elizabeth herself, this invitation was so far from exciting in her the same feelings as in her mother and Lydia, that she considered it as the death warrant of all possibility of common sense for the latter; and detestable as such a step must make her were it known, she could not help secretly advising her father not to let her go. She represented to him all the improprieties of Lydia's general behaviour, the little advantage she could derive from the friendship of such a woman as Mrs. Forster, and the probability of her being yet more imprudent with such a companion at Brighton, where the temptations must be greater than at home. He heard her attentively, and then said: 
"Lydia will never be easy until she has exposed herself in some public place or other, and we can never expect her to do it with so little expense or inconvenience to her family as under the present circumstances." 
"If you were aware," said Elizabeth, "of the very great disadvantage to us all which must arise from the public notice of Lydia's unguarded and imprudent manner\97nay, which has already arisen from it, I am sure you would judge differently in the affair." 
"Already arisen?" repeated Mr. Bennet. "What, has she frightened away some of your lovers? Poor little Lizzy! But do not be cast down. Such squeamish youths as cannot bear to be connected with a little absurdity are not worth a regret. Come, let me see the list of pitiful fellows who have been kept aloof by Lydia's folly." 
"Indeed you are mistaken. I have no such injuries to resent. It is not of particular, but of general evils, which I am now complaining. Our importance, our respectability in the world must be affected by the wild volatility, the assurance and disdain of all restraint which mark Lydia's character. Excuse me, for I must speak plainly. If you, my dear father, will not take the trouble of checking her exuberant spirits, and of teaching her that her present pursuits are not to be the business of her life, she will soon be beyond the reach of amendment. Her character will be fixed, and she will, at sixteen, be the most determined flirt that ever made herself or her family ridiculous; a flirt, too, in the worst and meanest degree of flirtation; without any attraction beyond youth and a tolerable person; and, from the ignorance and emptiness of her mind, wholly unable to ward off any portion of that universal contempt which her rage for admiration will excite. In this danger Kitty also is comprehended. She will follow wherever Lydia leads. Vain, ignorant, idle, and absolutely uncontrolled! Oh! my dear father, can you suppose it possible that they will not be censured and despised wherever they are known, and that their sisters will not be often involved in the disgrace?" 
Mr. Bennet saw that her whole heart was in the subject, and affectionately taking her hand said in reply: 
"Do not make yourself uneasy, my love. Wherever you and Jane are known you must be respected and valued; and you will not appear to less advantage for having a couple of\97or I may say, three\97very silly sisters. We shall have no peace at Longbourn if Lydia does not go to Brighton. Let her go, then. Colonel Forster is a sensible man, and will keep her out of any real mischief; and she is luckily too poor to be an object of prey to anybody. At Brighton she will be of less importance even as a common flirt than she has been here. The officers will find women better worth their notice. Let us hope, therefore, that her being there may teach her her own insignificance. At any rate, she cannot grow many degrees worse, without authorising us to lock her up for the rest of her life." 
With this answer Elizabeth was forced to be content; but her own opinion continued the same, and she left him disappointed and sorry. It was not in her nature, however, to increase her vexations by dwelling on them. She was confident of having performed her duty, and to fret over unavoidable evils, or augment them by anxiety, was no part of her disposition. 
Had Lydia and her mother known the substance of her conference with her father, their indignation would hardly have found expression in their united volubility. In Lydia's imagination, a visit to Brighton comprised every possibility of earthly happiness. She saw, with the creative eye of fancy, the streets of that gay bathing-place covered with officers. She saw herself the object of attention, to tens and to scores of them at present unknown. She saw all the glories of the camp\97its tents stretched forth in beauteous uniformity of lines, crowded with the young and the gay, and dazzling with scarlet; and, to complete the view, she saw herself seated beneath a tent, tenderly flirting with at least six officers at once. 
Had she known her sister sought to tear her from such prospects and such realities as these, what would have been her sensations? They could have been understood only by her mother, who might have felt nearly the same. Lydia's going to Brighton was all that consoled her for her melancholy conviction of her husband's never intending to go there himself. 
But they were entirely ignorant of what had passed; and their raptures continued, with little intermission, to the very day of Lydia's leaving home. 
Elizabeth was now to see Mr. Wickham for the last time. Having been frequently in company with him since her return, agitation was pretty well over; the agitations of formal partiality entirely so. She had even learnt to detect, in the very gentleness which had first delighted her, an affectation and a sameness to disgust and weary. In his present behaviour to herself, moreover, she had a fresh source of displeasure, for the inclination he soon testified of renewing those intentions which had marked the early part of their acquaintance could only serve, after what had since passed, to provoke her. She lost all concern for him in finding herself thus selected as the object of such idle and frivolous gallantry; and while she steadily repressed it, could not but feel the reproof contained in his believing, that however long, and for whatever cause, his attentions had been withdrawn, her vanity would be gratified, and her preference secured at any time by their renewal. 
On the very last day of the regiment's remaining at Meryton, he dined, with other of the officers, at Longbourn; and so little was Elizabeth disposed to part from him in good humour, that on his making some inquiry as to the manner in which her time had passed at Hunsford, she mentioned Colonel Fitzwilliam's and Mr. Darcy's having both spent three weeks at Rosings, and asked him, if he was acquainted with the former. 
He looked surprised, displeased, alarmed; but with a moment's recollection and a returning smile, replied, that he had formerly seen him often; and, after observing that he was a very gentlemanlike man, asked her how she had liked him. Her answer was warmly in his favour. With an air of indifference he soon afterwards added: 
"How long did you say he was at Rosings?" 
"Nearly three weeks." 
"And you saw him frequently?" 
"Yes, almost every day." 
"His manners are very different from his cousin's." 
"Yes, very different. But I think Mr. Darcy improves upon acquaintance." 
"Indeed!" cried Mr. Wickham with a look which did not escape her. "And pray, may I ask?\97" But checking himself, he added, in a gayer tone, "Is it in address that he improves? Has he deigned to add aught of civility to his ordinary style?\97for I dare not hope," he continued in a lower and more serious tone, "that he is improved in essentials." 
"Oh, no!" said Elizabeth. "In essentials, I believe, he is very much what he ever was." 
While she spoke, Wickham looked as if scarcely knowing whether to rejoice over her words, or to distrust their meaning. There was a something in her countenance which made him listen with an apprehensive and anxious attention, while she added: 
"When I said that he improved on acquaintance, I did not mean that his mind or his manners were in a state of improvement, but that, from knowing him better, his disposition was better understood." 
Wickham's alarm now appeared in a heightened complexion and agitated look; for a few minuted he was silent, till, shaking off his embarrassment, he turned to her again, and said in the gentlest of accents: 
"You, who so well know my feeling towards Mr. Darcy, will readily comprehend how sincerely I must rejoice that he is wise enough to assume even the APPEARANCE of what is right. His pride, in that direction, may be of service, if not to himself, to many others, for it must only deter him from such foul misconduct as I have suffered by. I only fear that the sort of cautiousness to which you, I imagine, have been alluding, is merely adopted on his visits to his aunt, of whose good opinion and judgement he stands much in awe. His fear of her has always operated, I know, when they were together; and a good deal is to be imputed to his wish of forwarding the match with Miss de Bourgh, which I am certain he has very much at heart." 
Elizabeth could not repress a smile at this, but she answered only by a slight inclination of the head. She saw that he wanted to engage her on the old subject of his grievances, and she was in no humour to indulge him. The rest of the evening passed with the APPEARANCE, on his side, of usual cheerfulness, but with no further attempt to distinguish Elizabeth; and they parted at last with mutual civility, and possibly a mutual desire of never meeting again. 
When the party broke up, Lydia returned with Mrs. Forster to Meryton, from whence they were to set out early the next morning. The separation between her and her family was rather noisy than pathetic. Kitty was the only one who shed tears; but she did weep from vexation and envy. Mrs. Bennet was diffuse in her good wishes for the felicity of her daughter, and impressive in her injunctions that she should not miss the opportunity of enjoying herself as much as possible\97advice which there was every reason to believe would be well attended to; and in the clamorous happiness of Lydia herself in bidding farewell, the more gentle adieus of her sisters were uttered without being heard. 
Chapter 42
Had Elizabeth's opinion been all drawn from her own family, she could not have formed a very pleasing opinion of conjugal felicity or domestic comfort. Her father, captivated by youth and beauty, and that appearance of good humour which youth and beauty generally give, had married a woman whose weak understanding and illiberal mind had very early in their marriage put and end to all real affection for her. Respect, esteem, and confidence had vanished for ever; and all his views of domestic happiness were overthrown. But Mr. Bennet was not of a disposition to seek comfort for the disappointment which his own imprudence had brought on, in any of those pleasures which too often console the unfortunate for their folly of their vice. He was fond of the country and of books; and from these tastes had arisen his principal enjoyments. To his wife he was very little otherwise indebted, than as her ignorance and folly had contributed to his amusement. This is not the sort of happiness which a man would in general wish to owe to his wife; but where other powers of entertainment are wanting, the true philosopher will derive benefit from such as are given. 
Elizabeth, however, had never been blind to the impropriety of her father's behaviour as a husband. She had always seen it with pain; but respecting his abilities, and grateful for his affectionate treatment of herself, she endeavoured to forget what she could not overlook, and to banish from her thoughts that continual breach of conjugal obligation and decorum which, in exposing his wife to the contempt of her own children, was so highly reprehensible. But she had never felt so strongly as now the disadvantages which must attend the children of so unsuitable a marriage, nor ever been so fully aware of the evils arising from so ill-judged a direction of talents; talents, which, rightly used, might at least have preserved the respectability of his daughters, even if incapable of enlarging the mind of his wife. 
When Elizabeth had rejoiced over Wickham's departure she found little other cause for satisfaction in the loss of the regiment. Their parties abroad were less varied than before, and at home she had a mother and sister whose constant repinings at the dullness of everything around them threw a real gloom over their domestic circle; and, though Kitty might in time regain her natural degree of sense, since the disturbers of her brain were removed, her other sister, from whose disposition greater evil might be apprehended, was likely to be hardened in all her folly and assurance by a situation of such double danger as a watering-place and a camp. Upon the whole, therefore, she found, what has been sometimes been found before, that an event to which she had been looking with impatient desire did not, in taking place, bring all the satisfaction she had promised herself. It was consequently necessary to name some other period for the commencement of actual felicity\97to have some other point on which her wishes and hopes might be fixed, and by again enjoying the pleasure of anticipation, console herself for the present, and prepare for another disappointment. Her tour to the Lakes was now the object of her happiest thoughts; it was her best consolation for all the uncomfortable hours which the discontentedness of her mother and Kitty made inevitable; and could she have included Jane in the scheme, every part of it would have been perfect. 
"But it is fortunate," thought she, "that I have something to wish for. Were the whole arrangement complete, my disappointment would be certain. But here, by carrying with me one ceaseless source of regret in my sister's absence, I may reasonably hope to have all my expectations of pleasure realised. A scheme of which every part promises delight can never be successful; and general disappointment is only warded off by the defence of some little peculiar vexation." 
When Lydia went away she promised to write very often and very minutely to her mother and Kitty; but her letters were always long expected, and always very short. Those to her mother contained little else than that they were just returned from the library, where such and such officers had attended them, and where she had seen such beautiful ornaments as made her quite wild; that she had a new gown, or a new parasol, which she would have described more fully, but was obliged to leave off in a violent hurry, as Mrs. Forster called her, and they were going off to the camp; and from her correspondence with her sister, there was still less to be learnt\97for her letters to Kitty, though rather longer, were much too full of lines under the words to be made public. 
After the first fortnight or three weeks of her absence, health, good humour, and cheerfulness began to reappear at Longbourn. Everything wore a happier aspect. The families who had been in town for the winter came back again, and summer finery and summer engagements arose. Mrs. Bennet was restored to her usual querulous serenity; and, by the middle of June, Kitty was so much recovered as to be able to enter Meryton without tears; an event of such happy promise as to make Elizabeth hope that by the following Christmas she might be so tolerably reasonable as not to mention an officer above once a day, unless, by some cruel and malicious arrangement at the War Office, another regiment should be quartered in Meryton. 
The time fixed for the beginning of their northern tour was now fast approaching, and a fortnight only was wanting of it, when a letter arrived from Mrs. Gardiner, which at once delayed its commencement and curtailed its extent. Mr. Gardiner would be prevented by business from setting out till a fortnight later in July, and must be in London again within a month, and as that left too short a period for them to go so far, and see so much as they had proposed, or at least to see it with the leisure and comfort they had built on, they were obliged to give up the Lakes, and substitute a more contracted tour, and, according to the present plan, were to go no farther northwards than Derbyshire. In that county there was enough to be seen to occupy the chief of their three weeks; and to Mrs. Gardiner it had a peculiarly strong attraction. The town where she had formerly passed some years of her life, and where they were now to spend a few days, was probably as great an object of her curiosity as all the celebrated beauties of Matlock, Chatsworth, Dovedale, or the Peak. 
Elizabeth was excessively disappointed; she had set her heart on seeing the Lakes, and still thought there might have been time enough. But it was her business to be satisfied\97and certainly her temper to be happy; and all was soon right again. 
With the mention of Derbyshire there were many ideas connected. It was impossible for her to see the word without thinking of Pemberley and its owner. "But surely," said she, "I may enter his county without impunity, and rob it of a few petrified spars without his perceiving me." 
The period of expectation was now doubled. Four weeks were to pass away before her uncle and aunt's arrival. But they did pass away, and Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner, with their four children, did at length appear at Longbourn. The children, two girls of six and eight years old, and two younger boys, were to be left under the particular care of their cousin Jane, who was the general favourite, and whose steady sense and sweetness of temper exactly adapted her for attending to them in every way\97teaching them, playing with them, and loving them. 
The Gardiners stayed only one night at Longbourn, and set off the next morning with Elizabeth in pursuit of novelty and amusement. One enjoyment was certain\97that of suitableness of companions; a suitableness which comprehended health and temper to bear inconveniences\97cheerfulness to enhance every pleasure\97and affection and intelligence, which might supply it among themselves if there were disappointments abroad. 
It is not the object of this work to give a description of Derbyshire, nor of any of the remarkable places through which their route thither lay; Oxford, Blenheim, Warwick, Kenilworth, Birmingham, etc. are sufficiently known. A small part of Derbyshire is all the present concern. To the little town of Lambton, the scene of Mrs. Gardiner's former residence, and where she had lately learned some acquaintance still remained, they bent their steps, after having seen all the principal wonders of the country; and within five miles of Lambton, Elizabeth found from her aunt that Pemberley was situated. It was not in their direct road, nor more than a mile or two out of it. In talking over their route the evening before, Mrs. Gardiner expressed an inclination to see the place again. Mr. Gardiner declared his willingness, and Elizabeth was applied to for her approbation. 
"My love, should not you like to see a place of which you have heard so much?" said her aunt; "a place, too, with which so many of your acquaintances are connected. Wickham passed all his youth there, you know." 
Elizabeth was distressed. She felt that she had no business at Pemberley, and was obliged to assume a disinclination for seeing it. She must own that she was tired of seeing great houses; after going over so many, she really had no pleasure in fine carpets or satin curtains. 
Mrs. Gardiner abused her stupidity. "If it were merely a fine house richly furnished," said she, "I should not care about it myself; but the grounds are delightful. They have some of the finest woods in the country." 
Elizabeth said no more\97but her mind could not acquiesce. The possibility of meeting Mr. Darcy, while viewing the place, instantly occurred. It would be dreadful! She blushed at the very idea, and thought it would be better to speak openly to her aunt than to run such a risk. But against this there were objections; and she finally resolved that it could be the last resource, if her private inquiries to the absence of the family were unfavourably answered. 
Accordingly, when she retired at night, she asked the chambermaid whether Pemberley were not a very fine place? what was the name of its proprietor? and, with no little alarm, whether the family were down for the summer? A most welcome negative followed the last question\97and her alarms now being removed, she was at leisure to feel a great deal of curiosity to see the house herself; and when the subject was revived the next morning, and she was again applied to, could readily answer, and with a proper air of indifference, that she had not really any dislike to the scheme. To Pemberley, therefore, they were to go. 
Chapter 43
Elizabeth, as they drove along, watched for the first appearance of Pemberley Woods with some perturbation; and when at length they turned in at the lodge, her spirits were in a high flutter. 
The park was very large, and contained great variety of ground. They entered it in one of its lowest points, and drove for some time through a beautiful wood stretching over a wide extent. 
Elizabeth's mind was too full for conversation, but she saw and admired every remarkable spot and point of view. They gradually ascended for half-a-mile, and then found themselves at the top of a considerable eminence, where the wood ceased, and the eye was instantly caught by Pemberley House, situated on the opposite side of a valley, into which the road with some abruptness wound. It was a large, handsome stone building, standing well on rising ground, and backed by a ridge of high woody hills; and in front, a stream of some natural importance was swelled into greater, but without any artificial appearance. Its banks were neither formal nor falsely adorned. Elizabeth was delighted. She had never seen a place for which nature had done more, or where natural beauty had been so little counteracted by an awkward taste. They were all of them warm in their admiration; and at that moment she felt that to be mistress of Pemberley might be something! 
They descended the hill, crossed the bridge, and drove to the door; and, while examining the nearer aspect of the house, all her apprehension of meeting its owner returned. She dreaded lest the chambermaid had been mistaken. On applying to see the place, they were admitted into the hall; and Elizabeth, as they waited for the housekeeper, had leisure to wonder at her being where she was. 
The housekeeper came; a respectable-looking elderly woman, much less fine, and more civil, than she had any notion of finding her. They followed her into the dining-parlour. It was a large, well proportioned room, handsomely fitted up. Elizabeth, after slightly surveying it, went to a window to enjoy its prospect. The hill, crowned with wood, which they had descended, receiving increased abruptness from the distance, was a beautiful object. Every disposition of the ground was good; and she looked on the whole scene, the river, the trees scattered on its banks and the winding of the valley, as far as she could trace it, with delight. As they passed into other rooms these objects were taking different positions; but from every window there were beauties to be seen. The rooms were lofty and handsome, and their furniture suitable to the fortune of its proprietor; but Elizabeth saw, with admiration of his taste, that it was neither gaudy nor uselessly fine; with less of splendour, and more real elegance, than the furniture of Rosings. 
"And of this place," thought she, "I might have been mistress! With these rooms I might now have been familiarly acquainted! Instead of viewing them as a stranger, I might have rejoiced in them as my own, and welcomed to them as visitors my uncle and aunt. But no,"\97recollecting herself\97"that could never be; my uncle and aunt would have been lost to me; I should not have been allowed to invite them." 
This was a lucky recollection\97it saved her from something very like regret. 
She longed to inquire of the housekeeper whether her master was really absent, but had not the courage for it. At length however, the question was asked by her uncle; and she turned away with alarm, while Mrs. Reynolds replied that he was, adding, "But we expect him to-morrow, with a large party of friends." How rejoiced was Elizabeth that their own journey had not by any circumstance been delayed a day! 
Her aunt now called her to look at a picture. She approached and saw the likeness of Mr. Wickham, suspended, amongst several other miniatures, over the mantelpiece. Her aunt asked her, smilingly, how she liked it. The housekeeper came forward, and told them it was a picture of a young gentleman, the son of her late master's steward, who had been brought up by him at his own expense. "He is now gone into the army," she added; "but I am afraid he has turned out very wild." 
Mrs. Gardiner looked at her niece with a smile, but Elizabeth could not return it. 
"And that," said Mrs. Reynolds, pointing to another of the miniatures, "is my master\97and very like him. It was drawn at the same time as the other\97about eight years ago." 
"I have heard much of your master's fine person," said Mrs. Gardiner, looking at the picture; "it is a handsome face. But, Lizzy, you can tell us whether it is like or not." 
Mrs. Reynolds respect for Elizabeth seemed to increase on this intimation of her knowing her master. 
"Does that young lady know Mr. Darcy?" 
Elizabeth coloured, and said: "A little." 
"And do not you think him a very handsome gentleman, ma'am?" 
"Yes, very handsome." 
"I am sure I know none so handsome; but in the gallery upstairs you will see a finer, larger picture of him than this. This room was my late master's favourite room, and these miniatures are just as they used to be then. He was very fond of them." 
This accounted to Elizabeth for Mr. Wickham's being among them. 
Mrs. Reynolds then directed their attention to one of Miss Darcy, drawn when she was only eight years old. 
"And is Miss Darcy as handsome as her brother?" said Mrs. Gardiner. 
"Oh! yes\97the handsomest young lady that ever was seen; and so accomplished!\97She plays and sings all day long. In the next room is a new instrument just come down for her\97a present from my master; she comes here to-morrow with him." 
Mr. Gardiner, whose manners were very easy and pleasant, encouraged her communicativeness by his questions and remarks; Mrs. Reynolds, either by pride or attachment, had evidently great pleasure in talking of her master and his sister. 
"Is your master much at Pemberley in the course of the year?" 
"Not so much as I could wish, sir; but I dare say he may spend half his time here; and Miss Darcy is always down for the summer months." 
"Except," thought Elizabeth, "when she goes to Ramsgate." 
"If your master would marry, you might see more of him." 
"Yes, sir; but I do not know when THAT will be. I do not know who is good enough for him." 
Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner smiled. Elizabeth could not help saying, "It is very much to his credit, I am sure, that you should think so." 
"I say no more than the truth, and everybody will say that knows him," replied the other. Elizabeth thought this was going pretty far; and she listened with increasing astonishment as the housekeeper added, "I have never known a cross word from him in my life, and I have known him ever since he was four years old." 
This was praise, of all others most extraordinary, most opposite to her ideas. That he was not a good-tempered man had been her firmest opinion. Her keenest attention was awakened; she longed to hear more, and was grateful to her uncle for saying: 
"There are very few people of whom so much can be said. You are lucky in having such a master." 
"Yes, sir, I know I am. If I were to go through the world, I could not meet with a better. But I have always observed, that they who are good-natured when children, are good-natured when they grow up; and he was always the sweetest-tempered, most generous-hearted boy in the world." 
Elizabeth almost stared at her. "Can this be Mr. Darcy?" thought she. 
"His father was an excellent man," said Mrs. Gardiner. 
"Yes, ma'am, that he was indeed; and his son will be just like him\97just as affable to the poor." 
Elizabeth listened, wondered, doubted, and was impatient for more. Mrs. Reynolds could interest her on no other point. She related the subjects of the pictures, the dimensions of the rooms, and the price of the furniture, in vain, Mr. Gardiner, highly amused by the kind of family prejudice to which he attributed her excessive commendation of her master, soon led again to the subject; and she dwelt with energy on his many merits as they proceeded together up the great staircase. 
"He is the best landlord, and the best master," said she, "that ever lived; not like the wild young men nowadays, who think of nothing but themselves. There is not one of his tenants or servants but will give him a good name. Some people call him proud; but I am sure I never saw anything of it. To my fancy, it is only because he does not rattle away like other young men." 
"In what an amiable light does this place him!" thought Elizabeth. 
"This fine account of him," whispered her aunt as they walked, "is not quite consistent with his behaviour to our poor friend." 
"Perhaps we might be deceived." 
"That is not very likely; our authority was too good." 
On reaching the spacious lobby above they were shown into a very pretty sitting-room, lately fitted up with greater elegance and lightness than the apartments below; and were informed that it was but just done to give pleasure to Miss Darcy, who had taken a liking to the room when last at Pemberley. 
"He is certainly a good brother," said Elizabeth, as she walked towards one of the windows. 
Mrs. Reynolds anticipated Miss Darcy's delight, when she should enter the room. "And this is always the way with him," she added. "Whatever can give his sister any pleasure is sure to be done in a moment. There is nothing he would not do for her." 
The picture-gallery, and two or three of the principal bedrooms, were all that remained to be shown. In the former were many good paintings; but Elizabeth knew nothing of the art; and from such as had been already visible below, she had willingly turned to look at some drawings of Miss Darcy's, in crayons, whose subjects were usually more interesting, and also more intelligible. 
In the gallery there were many family portraits, but they could have little to fix the attention of a stranger. Elizabeth walked in quest of the only face whose features would be known to her. At last it arrested her\97and she beheld a striking resemblance to Mr. Darcy, with such a smile over the face as she remembered to have sometimes seen when he looked at her. She stood several minutes before the picture, in earnest contemplation, and returned to it again before they quitted the gallery. Mrs. Reynolds informed them that it had been taken in his father's lifetime. 
There was certainly at this moment, in Elizabeth's mind, a more gentle sensation towards the original than she had ever felt at the height of their acquaintance. The commendation bestowed on him by Mrs. Reynolds was of no trifling nature. What praise is more valuable than the praise of an intelligent servant? As a brother, a landlord, a master, she considered how many people's happiness were in his guardianship!\97how much of pleasure or pain was it in his power to bestow!\97how much of good or evil must be done by him! Every idea that had been brought forward by the housekeeper was favourable to his character, and as she stood before the canvas on which he was represented, and fixed his eyes upon herself, she thought of his regard with a deeper sentiment of gratitude than it had ever raised before; she remembered its warmth, and softened its impropriety of expression. 
When all of the house that was open to general inspection had been seen, they returned downstairs, and, taking leave of the housekeeper, were consigned over to the gardener, who met them at the hall-door. 
As they walked across the hall towards the river, Elizabeth turned back to look again; her uncle and aunt stopped also, and while the former was conjecturing as to the date of the building, the owner of it himself suddenly came forward from the road, which led behind it to the stables. 
They were within twenty yards of each other, and so abrupt was his appearance, that it was impossible to avoid his sight. Their eyes instantly met, and the cheeks of both were overspread with the deepest blush. He absolutely started, and for a moment seemed immovable from surprise; but shortly recovering himself, advanced towards the party, and spoke to Elizabeth, if not in terms of perfect composure, at least of perfect civility. 
She had instinctively turned away; but stopping on his approach, received his compliments with an embarrassment impossible to be overcome. Had his first appearance, or his resemblance to the picture they had just been examining, been insufficient to assure the other two that they now saw Mr. Darcy, the gardener's expression of surprise, on beholding his master, must immediately have told it. They stood a little aloof while he was talking to their niece, who, astonished and confused, scarcely dared lift her eyes to his face, and knew not what answer she returned to his civil inquiries after her family. Amazed at the alteration of his manner since they last parted, every sentence that he uttered was increasing her embarrassment; and every idea of the impropriety of her being found there recurring to her mind, the few minutes in which they continued were some of the most uncomfortable in her life. Nor did he seem much more at ease; when he spoke, his accent had none of its usual sedateness; and he repeated his inquiries as to the time of her having left Longbourn, and of her having stayed in Derbyshire, so often, and in so hurried a way, as plainly spoke the distraction of his thoughts. 
At length every idea seemed to fail him; and, after standing a few moments without saying a word, he suddenly recollected himself, and took leave. 
The others then joined her, and expressed admiration of his figure; but Elizabeth heard not a word, and wholly engrossed by her own feelings, followed them in silence. She was overpowered by shame and vexation. Her coming there was the most unfortunate, the most ill-judged thing in the world! How strange it must appear to him! In what a disgraceful light might it not strike so vain a man! It might seem as if she had purposely thrown herself in his way again! Oh! why did she come? Or, why did he thus come a day before he was expected? Had they been only ten minutes sooner, they should have been beyond the reach of his discrimination; for it was plain that he was that moment arrived\97that moment alighted from his horse or his carriage. She blushed again and again over the perverseness of the meeting. And his behaviour, so strikingly altered\97what could it mean? That he should even speak to her was amazing!\97but to speak with such civility, to inquire after her family! Never in her life had she seen his manners so little dignified, never had he spoken with such gentleness as on this unexpected meeting. What a contrast did it offer to his last address in Rosings Park, when he put his letter into her hand! She knew not what to think, or how to account for it. 
They had now entered a beautiful walk by the side of the water, and every step was bringing forward a nobler fall of ground, or a finer reach of the woods to which they were approaching; but it was some time before Elizabeth was sensible of any of it; and, though she answered mechanically to the repeated appeals of her uncle and aunt, and seemed to direct her eyes to such objects as they pointed out, she distinguished no part of the scene. Her thoughts were all fixed on that one spot of Pemberley House, whichever it might be, where Mr. Darcy then was. She longed to know what at the moment was passing in his mind\97in what manner he thought of her, and whether, in defiance of everything, she was still dear to him. Perhaps he had been civil only because he felt himself at ease; yet there had been THAT in his voice which was not like ease. Whether he had felt more of pain or of pleasure in seeing her she could not tell, but he certainly had not seen her with composure. 
At length, however, the remarks of her companions on her absence of mind aroused her, and she felt the necessity of appearing more like herself. 
They entered the woods, and bidding adieu to the river for a while, ascended some of the higher grounds; when, in spots where the opening of the trees gave the eye power to wander, were many charming views of the valley, the opposite hills, with the long range of woods overspreading many, and occasionally part of the stream. Mr. Gardiner expressed a wish of going round the whole park, but feared it might be beyond a walk. With a triumphant smile they were told that it was ten miles round. It settled the matter; and they pursued the accustomed circuit; which brought them again, after some time, in a descent among hanging woods, to the edge of the water, and one of its narrowest parts. They crossed it by a simple bridge, in character with the general air of the scene; it was a spot less adorned than any they had yet visited; and the valley, here contracted into a glen, allowed room only for the stream, and a narrow walk amidst the rough coppice-wood which bordered it. Elizabeth longed to explore its windings; but when they had crossed the bridge, and perceived their distance from the house, Mrs. Gardiner, who was not a great walker, could go no farther, and thought only of returning to the carriage as quickly as possible. Her niece was, therefore, obliged to submit, and they took their way towards the house on the opposite side of the river, in the nearest direction; but their progress was slow, for Mr. Gardiner, though seldom able to indulge the taste, was very fond of fishing, and was so much engaged in watching the occasional appearance of some trout in the water, and talking to the man about them, that he advanced but little. Whilst wandering on in this slow manner, they were again surprised, and Elizabeth's astonishment was quite equal to what it had been at first, by the sight of Mr. Darcy approaching them, and at no great distance. The walk here being here less sheltered than on the other side, allowed them to see him before they met. Elizabeth, however astonished, was at least more prepared for an interview than before, and resolved to appear and to speak with calmness, if he really intended to meet them. For a few moments, indeed, she felt that he would probably strike into some other path. The idea lasted while a turning in the walk concealed him from their view; the turning past, he was immediately before them. With a glance, she saw that he had lost none of his recent civility; and, to imitate his politeness, she began, as they met, to admire the beauty of the place; but she had not got beyond the words "delightful," and "charming," when some unlucky recollections obtruded, and she fancied that praise of Pemberley from her might be mischievously construed. Her colour changed, and she said no more. 
Mrs. Gardiner was standing a little behind; and on her pausing, he asked her if she would do him the honour of introducing him to her friends. This was a stroke of civility for which she was quite unprepared; and she could hardly suppress a smile at his being now seeking the acquaintance of some of those very people against whom his pride had revolted in his offer to herself. "What will be his surprise," thought she, "when he knows who they are? He takes them now for people of fashion." 
The introduction, however, was immediately made; and as she named their relationship to herself, she stole a sly look at him, to see how he bore it, and was not without the expectation of his decamping as fast as he could from such disgraceful companions. That he was SURPRISED by the connection was evident; he sustained it, however, with fortitude, and so far from going away, turned his back with them, and entered into conversation with Mr. Gardiner. Elizabeth could not but be pleased, could not but triumph. It was consoling that he should know she had some relations for whom there was no need to blush. She listened most attentively to all that passed between them, and gloried in every expression, every sentence of her uncle, which marked his intelligence, his taste, or his good manners. 
The conversation soon turned upon fishing; and she heard Mr. Darcy invite him, with the greatest civility, to fish there as often as he chose while he continued in the neighbourhood, offering at the same time to supply him with fishing tackle, and pointing out those parts of the stream where there was usually most sport. Mrs. Gardiner, who was walking arm-in-arm with Elizabeth, gave her a look expressive of wonder. Elizabeth said nothing, but it gratified her exceedingly; the compliment must be all for herself. Her astonishment, however, was extreme, and continually was she repeating, "Why is he so altered? From what can it proceed? It cannot be for ME\97it cannot be for MY sake that his manners are thus softened. My reproofs at Hunsford could not work such a change as this. It is impossible that he should still love me." 
After walking some time in this way, the two ladies in front, the two gentlemen behind, on resuming their places, after descending to the brink of the river for the better inspection of some curious water-plant, there chanced to be a little alteration. It originated in Mrs. Gardiner, who, fatigued by the exercise of the morning, found Elizabeth's arm inadequate to her support, and consequently preferred her husband's. Mr. Darcy took her place by her niece, and they walked on together. After a short silence, the lady first spoke. She wished him to know that she had been assured of his absence before she came to the place, and accordingly began by observing, that his arrival had been very unexpected\97"for your housekeeper," she added, "informed us that you would certainly not be here till to-morrow; and indeed, before we left Bakewell, we understood that you were not immediately expected in the country." He acknowledged the truth of it all, and said that business with his steward had occasioned his coming forward a few hours before the rest of the party with whom he had been travelling. "They will join me early to-morrow," he continued, "and among them are some who will claim an acquaintance with you\97Mr. Bingley and his sisters." 
Elizabeth answered only by a slight bow. Her thoughts were instantly driven back to the time when Mr. Bingley's name had been the last mentioned between them; and, if she might judge by his complexion, HIS mind was not very differently engaged. 
"There is also one other person in the party," he continued after a pause, "who more particularly wishes to be known to you. Will you allow me, or do I ask too much, to introduce my sister to your acquaintance during your stay at Lambton?" 
The surprise of such an application was great indeed; it was too great for her to know in what manner she acceded to it. She immediately felt that whatever desire Miss Darcy might have of being acquainted with her must be the work of her brother, and, without looking farther, it was satisfactory; it was gratifying to know that his resentment had not made him think really ill of her. 
They now walked on in silence, each of them deep in thought. Elizabeth was not comfortable; that was impossible; but she was flattered and pleased. His wish of introducing his sister to her was a compliment of the highest kind. They soon outstripped the others, and when they had reached the carriage, Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner were half a quarter of a mile behind. 
He then asked her to walk into the house\97but she declared herself not tired, and they stood together on the lawn. At such a time much might have been said, and silence was very awkward. She wanted to talk, but there seemed to be an embargo on every subject. At last she recollected that she had been travelling, and they talked of Matlock and Dove Dale with great perseverance. Yet time and her aunt moved slowly\97and her patience and her ideas were nearly worn our before the tete-a-tete was over. On Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner's coming up they were all pressed to go into the house and take some refreshment; but this was declined, and they parted on each side with utmost politeness. Mr. Darcy handed the ladies into the carriage; and when it drove off, Elizabeth saw him walking slowly towards the house. 
The observations of her uncle and aunt now began; and each of them pronounced him to be infinitely superior to anything they had expected. "He is perfectly well behaved, polite, and unassuming," said her uncle. 
"There IS something a little stately in him, to be sure," replied her aunt, "but it is confined to his air, and is not unbecoming. I can now say with the housekeeper, that though some people may call him proud, I have seen nothing of it." 
"I was never more surprised than by his behaviour to us. It was more than civil; it was really attentive; and there was no necessity for such attention. His acquaintance with Elizabeth was very trifling." 
"To be sure, Lizzy," said her aunt, "he is not so handsome as Wickham; or, rather, he has not Wickham's countenance, for his features are perfectly good. But how came you to tell me that he was so disagreeable?" 
Elizabeth excused herself as well as she could; said that she had liked him better when they had met in Kent than before, and that she had never seen him so pleasant as this morning. 
"But perhaps he may be a little whimsical in his civilities," replied her uncle. "Your great men often are; and therefore I shall not take him at his word, as he might change his mind another day, and warn me off his grounds." 
Elizabeth felt that they had entirely misunderstood his character, but said nothing. 
"From what we have seen of him," continued Mrs. Gardiner, "I really should not have thought that he could have behaved in so cruel a way by anybody as he has done by poor Wickham. He has not an ill-natured look. On the contrary, there is something pleasing about his mouth when he speaks. And there is something of dignity in his countenance that would not give one an unfavourable idea of his heart. But, to be sure, the good lady who showed us his house did give him a most flaming character! I could hardly help laughing aloud sometimes. But he is a liberal master, I suppose, and THAT in the eye of a servant comprehends every virtue." 
Elizabeth here felt herself called on to say something in vindication of his behaviour to Wickham; and therefore gave them to understand, in as guarded a manner as she could, that by what she had heard from his relations in Kent, his actions were capable of a very different construction; and that his character was by no means so faulty, nor Wickham's so amiable, as they had been considered in Hertfordshire. In confirmation of this, she related the particulars of all the pecuniary transactions in which they had been connected, without actually naming her authority, but stating it to be such as such as might be relied on. 
Mrs. Gardiner was surprised and concerned; but as they were now approaching the scene of her former pleasures, every idea gave way to the charm of recollection; and she was too much engaged in pointing out to her husband all the interesting spots in its environs to think of anything else. Fatigued as she had been by the morning's walk they had no sooner dined than she set off again in quest of her former acquaintance, and the evening was spent in the satisfactions of a intercourse renewed after many years' discontinuance. 
The occurrences of the day were too full of interest to leave Elizabeth much attention for any of these new friends; and she could do nothing but think, and think with wonder, of Mr. Darcy's civility, and, above all, of his wishing her to be acquainted with his sister. 
Chapter 44
Elizabeth had settled it that Mr. Darcy would bring his sister to visit her the very day after her reaching Pemberley; and was consequently resolved not to be out of sight of the inn the whole of that morning. But her conclusion was false; for on the very morning after their arrival at Lambton, these visitors came. They had been walking about the place with some of their new friends, and were just returning to the inn to dress themselves for dining with the same family, when the sound of a carriage drew them to a window, and they saw a gentleman and a lady in a curricle driving up the street. Elizabeth immediately recognizing the livery, guessed what it meant, and imparted no small degree of her surprise to her relations by acquainting them with the honour which she expected. Her uncle and aunt were all amazement; and the embarrassment of her manner as she spoke, joined to the circumstance itself, and many of the circumstances of the preceding day, opened to them a new idea on the business. Nothing had ever suggested it before, but they felt that there was no other way of accounting for such attentions from such a quarter than by supposing a partiality for their niece. While these newly-born notions were passing in their heads, the perturbation of Elizabeth's feelings was at every moment increasing. She was quite amazed at her own discomposure; but amongst other causes of disquiet, she dreaded lest the partiality of the brother should have said too much in her favour; and, more than commonly anxious to please, she naturally suspected that every power of pleasing would fail her. 
She retreated from the window, fearful of being seen; and as she walked up and down the room, endeavouring to compose herself, saw such looks of inquiring surprise in her uncle and aunt as made everything worse. 
Miss Darcy and her brother appeared, and this formidable introduction took place. With astonishment did Elizabeth see that her new acquaintance was at least as much embarrassed as herself. Since her being at Lambton, she had heard that Miss Darcy was exceedingly proud; but the observation of a very few minutes convinced her that she was only exceedingly shy. She found it difficult to obtain even a word from her beyond a monosyllable. 
Miss Darcy was tall, and on a larger scale than Elizabeth; and, though little more than sixteen, her figure was formed, and her appearance womanly and graceful. She was less handsome than her brother; but there was sense and good humour in her face, and her manners were perfectly unassuming and gentle. Elizabeth, who had expected to find in her as acute and unembarrassed an observer as ever Mr. Darcy had been, was much relieved by discerning such different feelings. 
They had not long been together before Mr. Darcy told her that Bingley was also coming to wait on her; and she had barely time to express her satisfaction, and prepare for such a visitor, when Bingley's quick step was heard on the stairs, and in a moment he entered the room. All Elizabeth's anger against him had been long done away; but had she still felt any, it could hardly have stood its ground against the unaffected cordiality with which he expressed himself on seeing her again. He inquired in a friendly, though general way, after her family, and looked and spoke with the same good-humoured ease that he had ever done. 
To Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner he was scarcely a less interesting personage than to herself. They had long wished to see him. The whole party before them, indeed, excited a lively attention. The suspicions which had just arisen of Mr. Darcy and their niece directed their observation towards each with an earnest though guarded inquiry; and they soon drew from those inquiries the full conviction that one of them at least knew what it was to love. Of the lady's sensations they remained a little in doubt; but that the gentleman was overflowing with admiration was evident enough. 
Elizabeth, on her side, had much to do. She wanted to ascertain the feelings of each of her visitors; she wanted to compose her own, and to make herself agreeable to all; and in the latter object, where she feared most to fail, she was most sure of success, for those to whom she endeavoured to give pleasure were prepossessed in her favour. Bingley was ready, Georgiana was eager, and Darcy determined, to be pleased. 
In seeing Bingley, her thoughts naturally flew to her sister; and, oh! how ardently did she long to know whether any of his were directed in a like manner. Sometimes she could fancy that he talked less than on former occasions, and once or twice pleased herself with the notion that, as he looked at her, he was trying to trace a resemblance. But, though this might be imaginary, she could not be deceived as to his behaviour to Miss Darcy, who had been set up as a rival to Jane. No look appeared on either side that spoke particular regard. Nothing occurred between them that could justify the hopes of his sister. On this point she was soon satisfied; and two or three little circumstances occurred ere they parted, which, in her anxious interpretation, denoted a recollection of Jane not untinctured by tenderness, and a wish of saying more that might lead to the mention of her, had he dared. He observed to her, at a moment when the others were talking together, and in a tone which had something of real regret, that it "was a very long time since he had had the pleasure of seeing her;" and, before she could reply, he added, "It is above eight months. We have not met since the 26th of November, when we were all dancing together at Netherfield." 
Elizabeth was pleased to find his memory so exact; and he afterwards took occasion to ask her, when unattended to by any of the rest, whether ALL her sisters were at Longbourn. There was not much in the question, nor in the preceding remark; but there was a look and a manner which gave them meaning. 
It was not often that she could turn her eyes on Mr. Darcy himself; but, whenever she did catch a glimpse, she saw an expression of general complaisance, and in all that he said she heard an accent so removed from hauteur or disdain of his companions, as convinced her that the improvement of manners which she had yesterday witnessed however temporary its existence might prove, had at least outlived one day. When she saw him thus seeking the acquaintance and courting the good opinion of people with whom any intercourse a few months ago would have been a disgrace\97when she saw him thus civil, not only to herself, but to the very relations whom he had openly disdained, and recollected their last lively scene in Hunsford Parsonage\97the difference, the change was so great, and struck so forcibly on her mind, that she could hardly restrain her astonishment from being visible. Never, even in the company of his dear friends at Netherfield, or his dignified relations at Rosings, had she seen him so desirous to please, so free from self-consequence or unbending reserve, as now, when no importance could result from the success of his endeavours, and when even the acquaintance of those to whom his attentions were addressed would draw down the ridicule and censure of the ladies both of Netherfield as Rosings. 
Their visitors stayed with them above half-an-hour; and when they arose to depart, Mr. Darcy called on his sister to join him in expressing their wish of seeing Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner, and Miss Bennet, to dinner at Pemberley, before they left the country. Miss Darcy, though with a diffidence which marked her little in the habit of giving invitations, readily obeyed. Mrs. Gardiner looked at her niece, desirous of knowing how SHE, whom the invitation most concerned, felt disposed as to its acceptance, but Elizabeth had turned away her head. Presuming however, that this studied avoidance spoke rather a momentary embarrassment than any dislike of the proposal, and seeing in her husband, who was fond of society, a perfect willingness to accept it, she ventured to engage for her attendance, and the day after the next was fixed on. 
Bingley expressed great pleasure in the certainty of seeing Elizabeth again, having still a great deal to say to her, and many inquiries to make after all their Hertfordshire friends. Elizabeth, construing all this into a wish of hearing her speak of her sister, was pleased, and on this account, as well as some others, found herself, when their visitors left them, capable of considering the last half-hour with some satisfaction, though while it was passing, the enjoyment of it had been little. Eager to be alone, and fearful of inquiries or hints from her uncle and aunt, she stayed with them only long enough to hear their favourable opinion of Bingley, and then hurried away to dress. 
But she had no reason to fear Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner's curiosity; it was not their wish to force her communication. It was evident that she was much better acquainted with Mr. Darcy than they had before any idea of; it was evident that he was very much in love with her. They saw much to interest, but nothing to justify inquiry. 
Of Mr. Darcy it was now a matter of anxiety to think well; and, as far as their acquaintance reached, there was no fault to find. They could not be untouched by his politeness; and had they drawn his character from their own feelings and his servant's report, without any reference to any other account, the circle in Hertfordshire to which he was known would not have recognized it for Mr. Darcy. There was now an interest, however, in believing the housekeeper; and they soon became sensible that the authority of a servant who had known him since he was four years old, and whose own manners indicated respectability, was not to be hastily rejected. Neither had anything occurred in the intelligence of their Lambton friends that could materially lessen its weight. They had nothing to accuse him of but pride; pride he probably had, and if not, it would certainly be imputed by the inhabitants of a small market-town where the family did not visit. It was acknowledged, however, that he was a liberal man, and did much good among the poor. 
With respect to Wickham, the travellers soon found that he was not held there in much estimation; for though the chief of his concerns with the son of his patron were imperfectly understood, it was yet a well-known fact that, on his quitting Derbyshire, he had left many debts behind him, which Mr. Darcy afterwards discharged. 
As for Elizabeth, her thoughts were at Pemberley this evening more than the last; and the evening, though as it passed it seemed long, was not long enough to determine her feelings towards ONE in that mansion; and she lay awake two whole hours endeavouring to make them out. She certainly did not hate him. No; hatred had vanished long ago, and she had almost as long been ashamed of ever feeling a dislike against him, that could be so called. The respect created by the conviction of his valuable qualities, though at first unwillingly admitted, had for some time ceased to be repugnant to her feeling; and it was now heightened into somewhat of a friendlier nature, by the testimony so highly in his favour, and bringing forward his disposition in so amiable a light, which yesterday had produced. But above all, above respect and esteem, there was a motive within her of goodwill which could not be overlooked. It was gratitude; gratitude, not merely for having once loved her, but for loving her still well enough to forgive all the petulance and acrimony of her manner in rejecting him, and all the unjust accusations accompanying her rejection. He who, she had been persuaded, would avoid her as his greatest enemy, seemed, on this accidental meeting, most eager to preserve the acquaintance, and without any indelicate display of regard, or any peculiarity of manner, where their two selves only were concerned, was soliciting the good opinion of her friends, and bent on making her known to his sister. Such a change in a man of so much pride exciting not only astonishment but gratitude\97for to love, ardent love, it must be attributed; and as such its impression on her was of a sort to be encouraged, as by no means unpleasing, though it could not be exactly defined. She respected, she esteemed, she was grateful to him, she felt a real interest in his welfare; and she only wanted to know how far she wished that welfare to depend upon herself, and how far it would be for the happiness of both that she should employ the power, which her fancy told her she still possessed, of bringing on her the renewal of his addresses. 
It had been settled in the evening between the aunt and the niece, that such a striking civility as Miss Darcy's in coming to see them on the very day of her arrival at Pemberley, for she had reached it only to a late breakfast, ought to be imitated, though it could not be equalled, by some exertion of politeness on their side; and, consequently, that it would be highly expedient to wait on her at Pemberley the following morning. They were, therefore, to go. Elizabeth was pleased; though when she asked herself the reason, she had very little to say in reply. 
Mr. Gardiner left them soon after breakfast. The fishing scheme had been renewed the day before, and a positive engagement made of his meeting some of the gentlemen at Pemberley before noon. 
Chapter 45
Convinced as Elizabeth now was that Miss Bingley's dislike of her had originated in jealousy, she could not help feeling how unwelcome her appearance at Pemberley must be to her, and was curious to know with how much civility on that lady's side the acquaintance would now be renewed. 
On reaching the house, they were shown through the hall into the saloon, whose northern aspect rendered it delightful for summer. Its windows opening to the ground, admitted a most refreshing view of the high woody hills behind the house, and of the beautiful oaks and Spanish chestnuts which were scattered over the intermediate lawn. 
In this house they were received by Miss Darcy, who was sitting there with Mrs. Hurst and Miss Bingley, and the lady with whom she lived in London. Georgiana's reception of them was very civil, but attended with all the embarrassment which, though proceeding from shyness and the fear of doing wrong, would easily give to those who felt themselves inferior the belief of her being proud and reserved. Mrs. Gardiner and her niece, however, did her justice, and pitied her. 
By Mrs. Hurst and Miss Bingley they were noticed only by a curtsey; and, on their being seated, a pause, awkward as such pauses must always be, succeeded for a few moments. It was first broken by Mrs. Annesley, a genteel, agreeable-looking woman, whose endeavour to introduce some kind of discourse proved her to be more truly well-bred than either of the others; and between her and Mrs. Gardiner, with occasional help from Elizabeth, the conversation was carried on. Miss Darcy looked as if she wished for courage enough to join in it; and sometimes did venture a short sentence when there was least danger of its being heard. 
Elizabeth soon saw that she was herself closely watched by Miss Bingley, and that she could not speak a word, especially to Miss Darcy, without calling her attention. This observation would not have prevented her from trying to talk to the latter, had they not been seated at an inconvenient distance; but she was not sorry to be spared the necessity of saying much. Her own thoughts were employing her. She expected every moment that some of the gentlemen would enter the room. She wished, she feared that the master of the house might be amongst them; and whether she wished or feared it most, she could scarcely determine. After sitting in this manner a quarter of an hour without hearing Miss Bingley's voice, Elizabeth was roused by receiving from her a cold inquiry after the health of her family. She answered with equal indifference and brevity, and the others said no more. 
The next variation which their visit afforded was produced by the entrance of servants with cold meat, cake, and a variety of all the finest fruits in season; but this did not take place till after many a significant look and smile from Mrs. Annesley to Miss Darcy had been given, to remind her of her post. There was now employment for the whole party\97for though they could not all talk, they could all eat; and the beautiful pyramids of grapes, nectarines, and peaches soon collected them round the table. 
While thus engaged, Elizabeth had a fair opportunity of deciding whether she most feared or wished for the appearance of Mr. Darcy, by the feelings which prevailed on his entering the room; and then, though but a moment before she had believed her wishes to predominate, she began to regret that he came. 
He had been some time with Mr. Gardiner, who, with two or three other gentlemen from the house, was engaged by the river, and had left him only on learning that the ladies of the family intended a visit to Georgiana that morning. No sooner did he appear than Elizabeth wisely resolved to be perfectly easy and unembarrassed; a resolution the more necessary to be made, but perhaps not the more easily kept, because she saw that the suspicions of the whole party were awakened against them, and that there was scarcely an eye which did not watch his behaviour when he first came into the room. In no countenance was attentive curiosity so strongly marked as in Miss Bingley's, in spite of the smiles which overspread her face whenever she spoke to one of its objects; for jealousy had not yet made her desperate, and her attentions to Mr. Darcy were by no means over. Miss Darcy, on her brother's entrance, exerted herself much more to talk, and Elizabeth saw that he was anxious for his sister and herself to get acquainted, and forwarded as much as possible, every attempt at conversation on either side. Miss Bingley saw all this likewise; and, in the imprudence of anger, took the first opportunity of saying, with sneering civility: 
"Pray, Miss Eliza, are not the \97\97shire Militia removed from Meryton? They must be a great loss to YOUR family." 
In Darcy's presence she dared not mention Wickham's name; but Elizabeth instantly comprehended that he was uppermost in her thoughts; and the various recollections connected with him gave her a moment's distress; but exerting herself vigorously to repel the ill-natured attack, she presently answered the question in a tolerably detached tone. While she spoke, an involuntary glance showed her Darcy, with a heightened complexion, earnestly looking at her, and his sister overcome with confusion, and unable to lift up her eyes. Had Miss Bingley known what pain she was then giving her beloved friend, she undoubtedly would have refrained from the hint; but she had merely intended to discompose Elizabeth by bringing forward the idea of a man to whom she believed her partial, to make her betray a sensibility which might injure her in Darcy's opinion, and, perhaps, to remind the latter of all the follies and absurdities by which some part of her family were connected with that corps. Not a syllable had ever reached her of Miss Darcy's meditated elopement. To no creature had it been revealed, where secrecy was possible, except to Elizabeth; and from all Bingley's connections her brother was particularly anxious to conceal it, from the very wish which Elizabeth had long ago attributed to him, of their becoming hereafter her own. He had certainly formed such a plan, and without meaning that it should effect his endeavour to separate him from Miss Bennet, it is probable that it might add something to his lively concern for the welfare of his friend. 
Elizabeth's collected behaviour, however, soon quieted his emotion; and as Miss Bingley, vexed and disappointed, dared not approach nearer to Wickham, Georgiana also recovered in time, though not enough to be able to speak any more. Her brother, whose eye she feared to meet, scarcely recollected her interest in the affair, and the very circumstance which had been designed to turn his thoughts from Elizabeth seemed to have fixed them on her more and more cheerfully. 
Their visit did not continue long after the question and answer above mentioned; and while Mr. Darcy was attending them to their carriage Miss Bingley was venting her feelings in criticisms on Elizabeth's person, behaviour, and dress. But Georgiana would not join her. Her brother's recommendation was enough to ensure her favour; his judgement could not err. And he had spoken in such terms of Elizabeth as to leave Georgiana without the power of finding her otherwise than lovely and amiable. When Darcy returned to the saloon, Miss Bingley could not help repeating to him some part of what she had been saying to his sister. 
"How very ill Miss Eliza Bennet looks this morning, Mr. Darcy," she cried; "I never in my life saw anyone so much altered as she is since the winter. She is grown so brown and coarse! Louisa and I were agreeing that we should not have known her again." 
However little Mr. Darcy might have liked such an address, he contented himself with coolly replying that he perceived no other alteration than her being rather tanned, no miraculous consequence of travelling in the summer. 
"For my own part," she rejoined, "I must confess that I never could see any beauty in her. Her face is too thin; her complexion has no brilliancy; and her features are not at all handsome. Her nose wants character\97there is nothing marked in its lines. Her teeth are tolerable, but not out of the common way; and as for her eyes, which have sometimes been called so fine, I could never see anything extraordinary in them. They have a sharp, shrewish look, which I do not like at all; and in her air altogether there is a self-sufficiency without fashion, which is intolerable." 
Persuaded as Miss Bingley was that Darcy admired Elizabeth, this was not the best method of recommending herself; but angry people are not always wise; and in seeing him at last look somewhat nettled, she had all the success she expected. He was resolutely silent, however, and, from a determination of making him speak, she continued: 
"I remember, when we first knew her in Hertfordshire, how amazed we all were to find that she was a reputed beauty; and I particularly recollect your saying one night, after they had been dining at Netherfield, 'SHE a beauty!\97I should as soon call her mother a wit.' But afterwards she seemed to improve on you, and I believe you thought her rather pretty at one time." 
"Yes," replied Darcy, who could contain himself no longer, "but THAT was only when I first saw her, for it is many months since I have considered her as one of the handsomest women of my acquaintances." 
He then went away, and Miss Bingley was left to all the satisfaction of having forced him to say what gave no one any pain but herself. 
Mrs. Gardiner and Elizabeth talked of all that had occurred during their visit, as they returned, except what had particularly interested them both. The look and behaviour of everybody they had seen were discussed, except of the person who had mostly engaged their attention. They talked of his sister, his friends, his house, his fruit\97of everything but himself; yet Elizabeth was longing to know what Mrs. Gardiner thought of him, and Mrs. Gardiner would have been highly gratified by her niece's beginning the subject. 
Chapter 46
Elizabeth had been a good deal disappointed in not finding a letter from Jane on their first arrival at Lambton; and this disappointment had been renewed on each of the mornings that had now been spent there; but on the third her repining was over, and her sister justified, by the receipt of two letters from her at once, on one of which was marked that it had been missent elsewhere. Elizabeth was not surprised at it, as Jane had written the direction remarkably ill. 
They had just been preparing to walk as the letters came in; and her uncle and aunt, leaving her to enjoy them in quiet, set off by themselves. The one missent must first be attended to; it had been written five days ago. The beginning contained an account of all their little parties and engagements, with such news as the country afforded; but the latter half, which was dated a day later, and written in evident agitation, gave more important intelligence. It was to this effect: 
"Since writing the above, dearest Lizzy, something has occurred of a most unexpected and serious nature; but I am afraid of alarming you\97be assured that we are all well. What I have to say relates to poor Lydia. An express came at twelve last night, just as we were all gone to bed, from Colonel Forster, to inform us that she was gone off to Scotland with one of his officers; to own the truth, with Wickham! Imagine our surprise. To Kitty, however, it does not seem so wholly unexpected. I am very, very sorry. So imprudent a match on both sides! But I am willing to hope the best, and that his character has been misunderstood. Thoughtless and indiscreet I can easily believe him, but this step (and let us rejoice over it) marks nothing bad at heart. His choice is disinterested at least, for he must know my father can give her nothing. Our poor mother is sadly grieved. My father bears it better. How thankful am I that we never let them know what has been said against him; we must forget it ourselves. They were off Saturday night about twelve, as is conjectured, but were not missed till yesterday morning at eight. The express was sent off directly. My dear Lizzy, they must have passed within ten miles of us. Colonel Forster gives us reason to expect him here soon. Lydia left a few lines for his wife, informing her of their intention. I must conclude, for I cannot be long from my poor mother. I am afraid you will not be able to make it out, but I hardly know what I have written." 
Without allowing herself time for consideration, and scarcely knowing what she felt, Elizabeth on finishing this letter instantly seized the other, and opening it with the utmost impatience, read as follows: it had been written a day later than the conclusion of the first. 
"By this time, my dearest sister, you have received my hurried letter; I wish this may be more intelligible, but though not confined for time, my head is so bewildered that I cannot answer for being coherent. Dearest Lizzy, I hardly know what I would write, but I have bad news for you, and it cannot be delayed. Imprudent as the marriage between Mr. Wickham and our poor Lydia would be, we are now anxious to be assured it has taken place, for there is but too much reason to fear they are not gone to Scotland. Colonel Forster came yesterday, having left Brighton the day before, not many hours after the express. Though Lydia's short letter to Mrs. F. gave them to understand that they were going to Gretna Green, something was dropped by Denny expressing his belief that W. never intended to go there, or to marry Lydia at all, which was repeated to Colonel F., who, instantly taking the alarm, set off from B. intending to trace their route. He did trace them easily to Clapham, but no further; for on entering that place, they removed into a hackney coach, and dismissed the chaise that brought them from Epsom. All that is known after this is, that they were seen to continue the London road. I know not what to think. After making every possible inquiry on that side London, Colonel F. came on into Hertfordshire, anxiously renewing them at all the turnpikes, and at the inns in Barnet and Hatfield, but without any success\97no such people had been seen to pass through. With the kindest concern he came on to Longbourn, and broke his apprehensions to us in a manner most creditable to his heart. I am sincerely grieved for him and Mrs. F., but no one can throw any blame on them. Our distress, my dear Lizzy, is very great. My father and mother believe the worst, but I cannot think so ill of him. Many circumstances might make it more eligible for them to be married privately in town than to pursue their first plan; and even if HE could form such a design against a young woman of Lydia's connections, which is not likely, can I suppose her so lost to everything? Impossible! I grieve to find, however, that Colonel F. is not disposed to depend upon their marriage; he shook his head when I expressed my hopes, and said he fear W. was not a man to be trusted. My poor mother is really ill, and keeps her room. Could she exert herself, it would be better; but this is not to be expected. And as to my father, I never in my life saw him so affected. Poor Kitty has anger for having concealed their attachment; but as it was a matter of confidence, one cannot wonder. I am truly glad, dearest Lizzy, that you have been spared something of these distressing scenes; but now, as the first shock is over, shall I own that I long for your return? I am not so selfish, however, as to press for it, if inconvenient. Adieu! I take up my pen again to do what I have just told you I would not; but circumstances are such that I cannot help earnestly begging you all to come here as soon as possible. I know my dear uncle and aunt so well, that I am not afraid of requesting it, though I have still something more to ask of the former. My father is going to London with Colonel Forster instantly, to try to discover her. What he means to do I am sure I know not; but his excessive distress will not allow him to pursue any measure in the best and safest way, and Colonel Forster is obliged to be at Brighton again to-morrow evening. In such and exigence, my uncle's advice and assistance would be everything in the world; he will immediately comprehend what I must feel, and I rely upon his goodness." 
"Oh! where, where is my uncle?" cried Elizabeth, darting from her seat as she finished the letter, in eagerness to follow him, without losing a moment of the time so precious; but as she reached the door it was opened by a servant, and Mr. Darcy appeared. Her pale face and impetuous manner made him start, and before he could recover himself to speak, she, in whose mind every idea was superseded by Lydia's situation, hastily exclaimed, "I beg your pardon, but I must leave you. I must find Mr. Gardiner this moment, on business that cannot be delayed; I have not an instant to loose." 
"Good God! what is the matter?" cried he, with more feeling than politeness; then recollecting himself, "I will not detain you a minute; but let me, or let the servant go after Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner. You are not well enough; you cannot go yourself." 
Elizabeth hesitated, but her knees trembled under her and she felt how little would be gained by her attempting to pursue them. Calling back the servant, therefore, she commissioned him, though in so breathless an accent as made her almost unintelligible, to fetch his master and mistress home instantly. 
On his quitting the room she sat down, unable to support herself, and looking so miserably ill, that it was impossible for Darcy to leave her, or to refrain from saying, in a tone of gentleness and commiseration, "Let me call your maid. Is there nothing you could take to give you present relief? A glass of wine; shall I get you one? You are very ill." 
"No, I thank you," she replied, endeavouring to recover herself. "There is nothing the matter with me. I am quite well; I am only distressed by some dreadful news which I have just received from Longbourn." 
She burst into tears as she alluded to it, and for a few minutes could not speak another word. Darcy, in wretched suspense, could only say something indistinctly of his concern, and observe her in compassionate silence. At length she spoke again. "I have just had a letter from Jane, with such dreadful news. It cannot be concealed from anyone. My younger sister has left all her friends\97has eloped; has thrown herself into the power of\97of Mr. Wickham. They are gone off together from Brighton. YOU know him too well to doubt the rest. She has no money, no connections, nothing that can tempt him to\97she is lost for ever." 
Darcy was fixed in astonishment. "When I consider," she added in a yet more agitated voice, "that I might have prevented it! I, who knew what he was. Had I but explained some part of it only\97some part of what I learnt, to my own family! Had his character been known, this could not have happened. But it is all\97all too late now." 
"I am grieved indeed," cried Darcy; "grieved\97shocked. But is it certain\97absolutely certain?" 
"Oh, yes! They left Brighton together on Sunday night, and were traced almost to London, but not beyond; they are certainly not gone to Scotland." 
"And what has been done, what has been attempted, to recover her?" 
"My father is gone to London, and Jane has written to beg my uncle's immediate assistance; and we shall be off, I hope, in half-an-hour. But nothing can be done\97I know very well that nothing can be done. How is such a man to be worked on? How are they even to be discovered? I have not the smallest hope. It is every way horrible!" 
Darcy shook his head in silent acquiescence. 
"When MY eyes were opened to his real character\97Oh! had I known what I ought, what I dared to do! But I knew not\97I was afraid of doing too much. Wretched, wretched mistake!" 
Darcy made no answer. He seemed scarcely to hear her, and was walking up and down the room in earnest meditation, his brow contracted, his air gloomy. Elizabeth soon observed, and instantly understood it. Her power was sinking; everything MUST sink under such a proof of family weakness, such an assurance of the deepest disgrace. She could neither wonder nor condemn, but the belief of his self-conquest brought nothing to her consolatory to her bosom, afforded no palliation of her distress. It was, on the contrary, exactly calculated to make her understand her own wishes; and never had she so honestly felt that she could have loved him, as now, when all love must be vain. 
But self, though it would intrude, could not engross her. Lydia\97the humiliation, the misery she was bringing on them all, soon swallowed up every private care; and covering her face with her handkerchief, Elizabeth was soon lost to everything else; and, after a pause of several minutes, was only recalled to a sense of her situation by the voice of her companion, who, in a manner which, though it spoke compassion, spoke likewise restraint, said, "I am afraid you have been long desiring my absence, nor have I anything to plead in excuse of my stay, but real, though unavailing concern. Would to Heaven that anything could be either said or done on my part that might offer consolation to such distress! But I will not torment you with vain wishes, which may seem purposely to ask for your thanks. This unfortunate affair will, I fear, prevent my sister's having the pleasure of seeing you at Pemberley to-day." 
"Oh, yes. Be so kind as to apologise for us to Miss Darcy. Say that urgent business calls us home immediately. Conceal the unhappy truth as long as it is possible, I know it cannot be long." 
He readily assured her of his secrecy; again expressed his sorrow for her distress, wished it a happier conclusion than there was at present reason to hope, and leaving his compliments for her relations, with only one serious, parting look, went away. 
As he quitted the room, Elizabeth felt how improbable it was that they should ever see each other again on such terms of cordiality as had marked their several meetings in Derbyshire; and as she threw a retrospective glance over the whole of their acquaintance, so full of contradictions and varieties, sighed at the perverseness of those feelings which would now have promoted its continuance, and would formerly have rejoiced in its termination. 
If gratitude and esteem are good foundations of affection, Elizabeth's change of sentiment will be neither improbable nor faulty. But if otherwise\97if regard springing from such sources is unreasonable or unnatural, in comparison of what is so often described as arising on a first interview with its object, and even before two words have been exchanged, nothing can be said in her defence, except that she had given somewhat of a trial to the latter method in her partiality for Wickham, and that its ill success might, perhaps, authorise her to seek the other less interesting mode of attachment. Be that as it may, she saw him go with regret; and in this early example of what Lydia's infamy must produce, found additional anguish as she reflected on that wretched business. Never, since reading Jane's second letter, had she entertained a hope of Wickham's meaning to marry her. No one but Jane, she thought, could flatter herself with such an expectation. Surprise was the least of her feelings on this development. While the contents of the first letter remained in her mind, she was all surprise\97all astonishment that Wickham should marry a girl whom it was impossible he could marry for money; and how Lydia could ever have attached him had appeared incomprehensible. But now it was all too natural. For such an attachment as this she might have sufficient charms; and though she did not suppose Lydia to be deliberately engaging in an elopement without the intention of marriage, she had no difficulty in believing that neither her virtue nor her understanding would preserve her from falling an easy prey. 
She had never perceived, while the regiment was in Hertfordshire, that Lydia had any partiality for him; but she was convinced that Lydia wanted only encouragement to attach herself to anybody. Sometimes one officer, sometimes another, had been her favourite, as their attentions raised them in her opinion. Her affections had continually been fluctuating but never without an object. The mischief of neglect and mistaken indulgence towards such a girl\97oh! how acutely did she now feel it! 
She was wild to be at home\97to hear, to see, to be upon the spot to share with Jane in the cares that must now fall wholly upon her, in a family so deranged, a father absent, a mother incapable of exertion, and requiring constant attendance; and though almost persuaded that nothing could be done for Lydia, her uncle's interference seemed of the utmost importance, and till he entered the room her impatience was severe. Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner had hurried back in alarm, supposing by the servant's account that their niece was taken suddenly ill; but satisfying them instantly on that head, she eagerly communicated the cause of their summons, reading the two letters aloud, and dwelling on the postscript of the last with trembling energy, though Lydia had never been a favourite with them, Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner could not but be deeply afflicted. Not Lydia only, but all were concerned in it; and after the first exclamations of surprise and horror, Mr. Gardiner promised every assistance in his power. Elizabeth, though expecting no less, thanked him with tears of gratitude; and all three being actuated by one spirit, everything relating to their journey was speedily settled. They were to be off as soon as possible. "But what is to be done about Pemberley?" cried Mrs. Gardiner. "John told us Mr. Darcy was here when you sent for us; was it so?" 
"Yes; and I told him we should not be able to keep our engagement. THAT is all settled." 
"What is all settled?" repeated the other, as she ran into her room to prepare. "And are they upon such terms as for her to disclose the real truth? Oh, that I knew how it was!" 
But wishes were vain, or at least could only serve to amuse her in the hurry and confusion of the following hour. Had Elizabeth been at leisure to be idle, she would have remained certain that all employment was impossible to one so wretched as herself; but she had her share of business as well as her aunt, and amongst the rest there were notes to be written to all their friends at Lambton, with false excuses for their sudden departure. An hour, however, saw the whole completed; and Mr. Gardiner meanwhile having settled his account at the inn, nothing remained to be done but to go; and Elizabeth, after all the misery of the morning, found herself, in a shorter space of time than she could have supposed, seated in the carriage, and on the road to Longbourn. 
Chapter 47
"I have been thinking it over again, Elizabeth," said her uncle, as they drove from the town; "and really, upon serious consideration, I am much more inclined than I was to judge as your eldest sister does on the matter. It appears to me so very unlikely that any young man should form such a design against a girl who is by no means unprotected or friendless, and who was actually staying in his colonel's family, that I am strongly inclined to hope the best. Could he expect that her friends would not step forward? Could he expect to be noticed again by the regiment, after such an affront to Colonel Forster? His temptation is not adequate to the risk!" 
"Do you really think so?" cried Elizabeth, brightening up for a moment. 
"Upon my word," said Mrs. Gardiner, "I begin to be of your uncle's opinion. It is really too great a violation of decency, honour, and interest, for him to be guilty of. I cannot think so very ill of Wickham. Can you yourself, Lizzy, so wholly give him up, as to believe him capable of it?" 
"Not, perhaps, of neglecting his own interest; but of every other neglect I can believe him capable. If, indeed, it should be so! But I dare not hope it. Why should they not go on to Scotland if that had been the case?" 
"In the first place," replied Mr. Gardiner, "there is no absolute proof that they are not gone to Scotland." 
"Oh! but their removing from the chaise into a hackney coach is such a presumption! And, besides, no traces of them were to be found on the Barnet road." 
"Well, then\97supposing them to be in London. They may be there, though for the purpose of concealment, for no more exceptional purpose. It is not likely that money should be very abundant on either side; and it might strike them that they could be more economically, though less expeditiously, married in London than in Scotland." 
But why all this secrecy? Why any fear of detection? Why must their marriage be private? Oh, no, no\97this is not likely. His most particular friend, you see by Jane's account, was persuaded of his never intending to marry her. Wickham will never marry a woman without some money. He cannot afford it. And what claims has Lydia\97what attraction has she beyond youth, health, and good humour that could make him, for her sake, forego every chance of benefiting himself by marrying well? As to what restraint the apprehensions of disgrace in the corps might throw on a dishonourable elopement with her, I am not able to judge; for I know nothing of the effects that such a step might produce. But as to your other objection, I am afraid it will hardly hold good. Lydia has no brothers to step forward; and he might imagine, from my father's behaviour, from his indolence and the little attention he has ever seemed to give to what was going forward in his family, that HE would do as little, and think as little about it, as any father could do, in such a matter." 
"But can you think that Lydia is so lost to everything but love of him as to consent to live with him on any terms other than marriage?" 
"It does seem, and it is most shocking indeed," replied Elizabeth, with tears in her eyes, "that a sister's sense of decency and virtue in such a point should admit of doubt. But, really, I know not what to say. Perhaps I am not doing her justice. But she is very young; she has never been taught to think on serious subjects; and for the last half-year, nay, for a twelvemonth\97she has been given up to nothing but amusement and vanity. She has been allowed to dispose of her time in the most idle and frivolous manner, and to adopt any opinions that came in her way. Since the \97\97shire were first quartered in Meryton, nothing but love, flirtation, and officers have been in her head. She has been doing everything in her power by thinking and talking on the subject, to give greater\97what shall I call it? susceptibility to her feelings; which are naturally lively enough. And we all know that Wickham has every charm of person and address that can captivate a woman." 
"But you see that Jane," said her aunt, "does not think so very ill of Wickham as to believe him capable of the attempt." 
"Of whom does Jane ever think ill? And who is there, whatever might be their former conduct, that she would think capable of such an attempt, till it were proved against them? But Jane knows, as well as I do, what Wickham really is. We both know that he has been profligate in every sense of the word; that he has neither integrity nor honour; that he is as false and deceitful as he is insinuating." 
"And do you really know all this?" cried Mrs. Gardiner, whose curiosity as to the mode of her intelligence was all alive. 
"I do indeed," replied Elizabeth, colouring. "I told you, the other day, of his infamous behaviour to Mr. Darcy; and you yourself, when last at Longbourn, heard in what manner he spoke of the man who had behaved with such forbearance and liberality towards him. And there are other circumstances which I am not at liberty\97which it is not worth while to relate; but his lies about the whole Pemberley family are endless. From what he said of Miss Darcy I was thoroughly prepared to see a proud, reserved, disagreeable girl. Yet he knew to the contrary himself. He must know that she was as amiable and unpretending as we have found her." 
"But does Lydia know nothing of this? can she be ignorant of what you and Jane seem so well to understand?" 
"Oh, yes!\97that, that is the worst of all. Till I was in Kent, and saw so much both of Mr. Darcy and his relation Colonel Fitzwilliam, I was ignorant of the truth myself. And when I returned home, the \97\97shire was to leave Meryton in a week or fortnight's time. As that was the case, neither Jane, to whom I related the whole, nor I, thought it necessary to make our knowledge public; for of what use could it apparently be to any one, that the good opinion which all the neighbourhood had of him should then be overthrown? And even when it was settled that Lydia should go with Mrs. Forster, the necessity of opening her eyes to his character never occurred to me. That SHE could be in any danger from the deception never entered my head. That such a consequence as THIS could ensue, you may easily believe, was far enough from my thoughts." 
"When they all removed to Brighton, therefore, you had no reason, I suppose, to believe them fond of each other?" 
"Not the slightest. I can remember no symptom of affection on either side; and had anything of the kind been perceptible, you must be aware that ours is not a family on which it could be thrown away. When first he entered the corps, she was ready enough to admire him; but so we all were. Every girl in or near Meryton was out of her senses about him for the first two months; but he never distinguished HER by any particular attention; and, consequently, after a moderate period of extravagant and wild admiration, her fancy for him gave way, and others of the regiment, who treated her with more distinction, again became her favourites." 
* * * * * 
It may be easily believed, that however little of novelty could be added to their fears, hopes, and conjectures, on this interesting subject, by its repeated discussion, no other could detain them from it long, during the whole of the journey. From Elizabeth's thoughts it was never absent. Fixed there by the keenest of all anguish, self-reproach, she could find no interval of ease or forgetfulness. 
They travelled as expeditiously as possible, and, sleeping one night on the road, reached Longbourn by dinner time the next day. It was a comfort to Elizabeth to consider that Jane could not have been wearied by long expectations. 
The little Gardiners, attracted by the sight of a chaise, were standing on the steps of the house as they entered the paddock; and, when the carriage drove up to the door, the joyful surprise that lighted up their faces, and displayed itself over their whole bodies, in a variety of capers and frisks, was the first pleasing earnest of their welcome. 
Elizabeth jumped out; and, after giving each of them a hasty kiss, hurried into the vestibule, where Jane, who came running down from her mother's apartment, immediately met her. 
Elizabeth, as she affectionately embraced her, whilst tears filled the eyes of both, lost not a moment in asking whether anything had been heard of the fugitives. 
"Not yet," replied Jane. "But now that my dear uncle is come, I hope everything will be well." 
"Is my father in town?" 
"Yes, he went on Tuesday, as I wrote you word." 
"And have you heard from him often?" 
"We have heard only twice. He wrote me a few lines on Wednesday to say that he had arrived in safety, and to give me his directions, which I particularly begged him to do. He merely added that he should not write again till he had something of importance to mention." 
"And my mother\97how is she? How are you all?" 
"My mother is tolerably well, I trust; though her spirits are greatly shaken. She is upstairs and will have great satisfaction in seeing you all. She does not yet leave her dressing-room. Mary and Kitty are, thank Heaven, are quite well." 
"But you\97how are you?" cried Elizabeth. "You look pale. How much you must have gone through!" 
Her sister, however, assured her of her being perfectly well; and their conversation, which had been passing while Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner were engaged with their children, was now put an end to by the approach of the whole party. Jane ran to her uncle and aunt, and welcomed and thanked them both, with alternate smiles and tears. 
When they were all in the drawing-room, the questions which Elizabeth had already asked were of course repeated by the others, and they soon found that Jane had no intelligence to give. The sanguine hope of good, however, which the benevolence of her heart suggested had not yet deserted her; she still expected that it would all end well, and that every morning would bring some letter, either from Lydia or her father, to explain their proceedings, and, perhaps, announce their marriage. 
Mrs. Bennet, to whose apartment they all repaired, after a few minutes' conversation together, received them exactly as might be expected; with tears and lamentations of regret, invectives against the villainous conduct of Wickham, and complaints of her own sufferings and ill-usage; blaming everybody but the person to whose ill-judging indulgence the errors of her daughter must principally be owing. 
"If I had been able," said she, "to carry my point in going to Brighton, with all my family, THIS would not have happened; but poor dear Lydia had nobody to take care of her. Why did the Forsters ever let her go out of their sight? I am sure there was some great neglect or other on their side, for she is not the kind of girl to do such a thing if she had been well looked after. I always thought they were very unfit to have the charge of her; but I was overruled, as I always am. Poor dear child! And now here's Mr. Bennet gone away, and I know he will fight Wickham, wherever he meets him and then he will be killed, and what is to become of us all? The Collinses will turn us out before he is cold in his grave, and if you are not kind to us, brother, I do not know what we shall do." 
They all exclaimed against such terrific ideas; and Mr. Gardiner, after general assurances of his affection for her and all her family, told her that he meant to be in London the very next day, and would assist Mr. Bennet in every endeavour for recovering Lydia. 
"Do not give way to useless alarm," added he; "though it is right to be prepared for the worst, there is no occasion to look on it as certain. It is not quite a week since they left Brighton. In a few days more we may gain some news of them; and till we know that they are not married, and have no design of marrying, do not let us give the matter over as lost. As soon as I get to town I shall go to my brother, and make him come home with me to Gracechurch Street; and then we may consult together as to what is to be done." 
"Oh! my dear brother," replied Mrs. Bennet, "that is exactly what I could most wish for. And now do, when you get to town, find them out, wherever they may be; and if they are not married already, MAKE them marry. And as for wedding clothes, do not let them wait for that, but tell Lydia she shall have as much money as she chooses to buy them, after they are married. And, above all, keep Mr. Bennet from fighting. Tell him what a dreadful state I am in, that I am frighted out of my wits\97and have such tremblings, such flutterings, all over me\97such spasms in my side and pains in my head, and such beatings at heart, that I can get no rest by night nor by day. And tell my dear Lydia not to give any directions about her clothes till she has seen me, for she does not know which are the best warehouses. Oh, brother, how kind you are! I know you will contrive it all." 
But Mr. Gardiner, though he assured her again of his earnest endeavours in the cause, could not avoid recommending moderation to her, as well in her hopes as her fear; and after talking with her in this manner till dinner was on the table, they all left her to vent all her feelings on the housekeeper, who attended in the absence of her daughters. 
Though her brother and sister were persuaded that there was no real occasion for such a seclusion from the family, they did not attempt to oppose it, for they knew that she had not prudence enough to hold her tongue before the servants, while they waited at table, and judged it better that ONE only of the household, and the one whom they could most trust should comprehend all her fears and solicitude on the subject. 
In the dining-room they were soon joined by Mary and Kitty, who had been too busily engaged in their separate apartments to make their appearance before. One came from her books, and the other from her toilette. The faces of both, however, were tolerably calm; and no change was visible in either, except that the loss of her favourite sister, or the anger which she had herself incurred in this business, had given more of fretfulness than usual to the accents of Kitty. As for Mary, she was mistress enough of herself to whisper to Elizabeth, with a countenance of grave reflection, soon after they were seated at table: 
"This is a most unfortunate affair, and will probably be much talked of. But we must stem the tide of malice, and pour into the wounded bosoms of each other the balm of sisterly consolation." 
Then, perceiving in Elizabeth no inclination of replying, she added, "Unhappy as the event must be for Lydia, we may draw from it this useful lesson: that loss of virtue in a female is irretrievable; that one false step involves her in endless ruin; that her reputation is no less brittle than it is beautiful; and that she cannot be too much guarded in her behaviour towards the undeserving of the other sex." 
Elizabeth lifted up her eyes in amazement, but was too much oppressed to make any reply. Mary, however, continued to console herself with such kind of moral extractions from the evil before them. 
In the afternoon, the two elder Miss Bennets were able to be for half-an-hour by themselves; and Elizabeth instantly availed herself of the opportunity of making any inquiries, which Jane was equally eager to satisfy. After joining in general lamentations over the dreadful sequel of this event, which Elizabeth considered as all but certain, and Miss Bennet could not assert to be wholly impossible, the former continued the subject, by saying, "But tell me all and everything about it which I have not already heard. Give me further particulars. hat did Colonel Forster say? Had they no apprehension of anything before the elopement took place? They must have seen them together for ever." 
"Colonel Forster did own that he had often suspected some partiality, especially on Lydia's side, but nothing to give him any alarm. I am so grieved for him! His behaviour was attentive and kind to the utmost. He WAS coming to us, in order to assure us of his concern, before he had any idea of their not being gone to Scotland: when that apprehension first got abroad, it hastened his journey." 
"And was Denny convinced that Wickham would not marry? Did he know of their intending to go off? Had Colonel Forster seen Denny himself?" 
"Yes; but, when questioned by HIM, Denny denied knowing anything of their plans, and would not give his real opinion about it. He did not repeat his persuasion of their not marrying\97and from THAT, I am inclined to hope, he might have been misunderstood before." 
"And till Colonel Forster came himself, not one of you entertained a doubt, I suppose, of their being really married?" 
"How was it possible that such an idea should enter our brains? I felt a little uneasy\97a little fearful of my sister's happiness with him in marriage, because I knew that his conduct had not been always quite right. My father and mother knew nothing of that; they only felt how imprudent a match it must be. Kitty then owned, with a very natural triumph on knowing more than the rest of us, that in Lydia's last letter she had prepared her for such a step. She had known, it seems, of their being in love with each other, many weeks." 
"But not before they went to Brighton?" 
"No, I believe not." 
"And did Colonel Forster appear to think well of Wickham himself? Does he know his real character?" 
"I must confess that he did not speak so well of Wickham as he formerly did. He believed him to be imprudent and extravagant. And since this sad affair has taken place, it is said that he left Meryton greatly in debt; but I hope this may be false." 
"Oh, Jane, had we been less secret, had we told what we knew of him, this could not have happened!" 
"Perhaps it would have been better," replied her sister. "But to expose the former faults of any person without knowing what their present feelings were, seemed unjustifiable. We acted with the best intentions." 
"Could Colonel Forster repeat the particulars of Lydia's note to his wife?" 
"He brought it with him for us to see." 
Jane then took it from her pocket-book, and gave it to Elizabeth. These were the contents: 
"MY DEAR HARRIET, 
"You will laugh when you know where I am gone, and I cannot help laughing myself at your surprise to-morrow morning, as soon as I am missed. I am going to Gretna Green, and if you cannot guess with who, I shall think you a simpleton, for there is but one man in the world I love, and he is an angel. I should never be happy without him, so think it no harm to be off. You need not send them word at Longbourn of my going, if you do not like it, for it will make the surprise the greater, when I write to them and sign my name 'Lydia Wickham.' What a good joke it will be! I can hardly write for laughing. Pray make my excuses to Pratt for not keeping my engagement, and dancing with him to-night. Tell him I hope he will excuse me when he knows all; and tell him I will dance with him at the next ball we meet, with great pleasure. I shall send for my clothes when I get to Longbourn; but I wish you would tell Sally to mend a great slit in my worked muslin gown before they are packed up. Good-bye. Give my love to Colonel Forster. I hope you will drink to our good journey. 
"Your affectionate friend, 
"LYDIA BENNET." 
"Oh! thoughtless, thoughtless Lydia!" cried Elizabeth when she had finished it. What a letter is this, to be written at such a moment! But at least it shows that SHE was serious on the subject of their journey. Whatever he might afterwards persuade her to, it was not on her side a SCHEME of infamy. My poor father! how he must have felt it!" 
"I never saw anyone so shocked. He could not speak a word for full ten minutes. My mother was taken ill immediately, and the whole house in such confusion!" 
"Oh! Jane," cried Elizabeth, "was there a servant belonging to it who did not know the whole story before the end of the day?" 
"I do not know. I hope there was. But to be guarded at such a time is very difficult. My mother was in hysterics, and though I endeavoured to give her every assistance in my power, I am afraid I did not do so much as I might have done! But the horror of what might possibly happen almost took from me my faculties." 
"Your attendance upon her has been too much for you. You do not look well. Oh that I had been with you! you have had every care and anxiety upon yourself alone." 
"Mary and Kitty have been very kind, and would have shared in every fatigue, I am sure; but I did not think it right for either of them. Kitty is slight and delicate; and Mary studies so much, that her hours of repose should not be broken in on. My aunt Phillips came to Longbourn on Tuesday, after my father went away; and was so good as to stay till Thursday with me. She was of great use and comfort to us all. And Lady Lucas has been very kind; she walked here on Wednesday morning to condole with us, and offered her services, or any of her daughters', if they should be of use to us." 
"She had better have stayed at home," cried Elizabeth; "perhaps she MEANT well, but, under such a misfortune as this, one cannot see too little of one's neighbours. Assistance is impossible; condolence insufferable. Let them triumph over us at a distance, and be satisfied." 
She then proceeded to inquire into the measures which her father had intended to pursue, while in town, for the recovery of his daughter. 
"He meant I believe," replied Jane, "to go to Epsom, the place where they last changed horses, see the postilions and try if anything could be made out from them. His principal object must be to discover the number of the hackney coach which took them from Clapham. It had come with a fare from London; and as he thought that the circumstance of a gentleman and lady's removing from one carriage into another might be remarked he meant to make inquiries at Clapham. If he could anyhow discover at what house the coachman had before set down his fare, he determined to make inquiries there, and hoped it might not be impossible to find out the stand and number of the coach. I do not know of any other designs that he had formed; but he was in such a hurry to be gone, and his spirits so greatly discomposed, that I had difficulty in finding out even so much as this." 
Chapter 48
The whole party were in hopes of a letter from Mr. Bennet the next morning, but the post came in without bringing a single line from him. His family knew him to be, on all common occasions, a most negligent and dilatory correspondent; but at such a time they had hoped for exertion. They were forced to conclude that he had no pleasing intelligence to send; but even of THAT they would have been glad to be certain. Mr. Gardiner had waited only for the letters before he set off. 
When he was gone, they were certain at least of receiving constant information of what was going on, and their uncle promised, at parting, to prevail on Mr. Bennet to return to Longbourn, as soon as he could, to the great consolation of his sister, who considered it as the only security for her husband's not being killed in a duel. 
Mrs. Gardiner and the children were to remain in Hertfordshire a few days longer, as the former thought her presence might be serviceable to her nieces. She shared in their attendance on Mrs. Bennet, and was a great comfort to them in their hours of freedom. Their other aunt also visited them frequently, and always, as she said, with the design of cheering and heartening them up\97though, as she never came without reporting some fresh instance of Wickham's extravagance or irregularity, she seldom went away without leaving them more dispirited than she found them. 
All Meryton seemed striving to blacken the man who, but three months before, had been almost an angel of light. He was declared to be in debt to every tradesman in the place, and his intrigues, all honoured with the title of seduction, had been extended into every tradesman's family. Everybody declared that he was the wickedest young man in the world; and everybody began to find out that they had always distrusted the appearance of his goodness. Elizabeth, though she did not credit above half of what was said, believed enough to make her former assurance of her sister's ruin more certain; and even Jane, who believed still less of it, became almost hopeless, more especially as the time was now come when, if they had gone to Scotland, which she had never before entirely despaired of, they must in all probability have gained some news of them. 
Mr. Gardiner left Longbourn on Sunday; on Tuesday his wife received a letter from him; it told them that, on his arrival, he had immediately found out his brother, and persuaded him to come to Gracechurch Street; that Mr. Bennet had been to Epsom and Clapham, before his arrival, but without gaining any satisfactory information; and that he was now determined to inquire at all the principal hotels in town, as Mr. Bennet thought it possible they might have gone to one of them, on their first coming to London, before they procured lodgings. Mr. Gardiner himself did not expect any success from this measure, but as his brother was eager in it, he meant to assist him in pursuing it. He added that Mr. Bennet seemed wholly disinclined at present to leave London and promised to write again very soon. There was also a postscript to this effect: 
"I have written to Colonel Forster to desire him to find out, if possible, from some of the young man's intimates in the regiment, whether Wickham has any relations or connections who would be likely to know in what part of town he has now concealed himself. If there were anyone that one could apply to with a probability of gaining such a clue as that, it might be of essential consequence. At present we have nothing to guide us. Colonel Forster will, I dare say, do everything in his power to satisfy us on this head. But, on second thoughts, perhaps, Lizzy could tell us what relations he has now living, better than any other person." 
Elizabeth was at no loss to understand from whence this deference to her authority proceeded; but it was not in her power to give any information of so satisfactory a nature as the compliment deserved. She had never heard of his having had any relations, except a father and mother, both of whom had been dead many years. It was possible, however, that some of his companions in the \97\97shire might be able to give more information; and though she was not very sanguine in expecting it, the application was a something to look forward to. 
Every day at Longbourn was now a day of anxiety; but the most anxious part of each was when the post was expected. The arrival of letters was the grand object of every morning's impatience. Through letters, whatever of good or bad was to be told would be communicated, and every succeeding day was expected to bring some news of importance. 
But before they heard again from Mr. Gardiner, a letter arrived for their father, from a different quarter, from Mr. Collins; which, as Jane had received directions to open all that came for him in his absence, she accordingly read; and Elizabeth, who knew what curiosities his letters always were, looked over her, and read it likewise. It was as follows: 
"MY DEAR SIR, 
"I feel myself called upon, by our relationship, and my situation in life, to condole with you on the grievous affliction you are now suffering under, of which we were yesterday informed by a letter from Hertfordshire. Be assured, my dear sir, that Mrs. Collins and myself sincerely sympathise with you and all your respectable family, in your present distress, which must be of the bitterest kind, because proceeding from a cause which no time can remove. No arguments shall be wanting on my part that can alleviate so severe a misfortune\97or that may comfort you, under a circumstance that must be of all others the most afflicting to a parent's mind. The death of your daughter would have been a blessing in comparison of this. And it is the more to be lamented, because there is reason to suppose as my dear Charlotte informs me, that this licentiousness of behaviour in your daughter has proceeded from a faulty degree of indulgence; though, at the same time, for the consolation of yourself and Mrs. Bennet, I am inclined to think that her own disposition must be naturally bad, or she could not be guilty of such an enormity, at so early an age. Howsoever that may be, you are grievously to be pitied; in which opinion I am not only joined by Mrs. Collins, but likewise by Lady Catherine and her daughter, to whom I have related the affair. They agree with me in apprehending that this false step in one daughter will be injurious to the fortunes of all the others; for who, as Lady Catherine herself condescendingly says, will connect themselves with such a family? And this consideration leads me moreover to reflect, with augmented satisfaction, on a certain event of last November; for had it been otherwise, I must have been involved in all your sorrow and disgrace. Let me then advise you, dear sir, to console yourself as much as possible, to throw off your unworthy child from your affection for ever, and leave her to reap the fruits of her own heinous offense. 
"I am, dear sir, etc., etc." 
Mr. Gardiner did not write again till he had received an answer from Colonel Forster; and then he had nothing of a pleasant nature to send. It was not known that Wickham had a single relationship with whom he kept up any connection, and it was certain that he had no near one living. His former acquaintances had been numerous; but since he had been in the militia, it did not appear that he was on terms of particular friendship with any of them. There was no one, therefore, who could be pointed out as likely to give any news of him. And in the wretched state of his own finances, there was a very powerful motive for secrecy, in addition to his fear of discovery by Lydia's relations, for it had just transpired that he had left gaming debts behind him to a very considerable amount. Colonel Forster believed that more than a thousand pounds would be necessary to clear his expenses at Brighton. He owed a good deal in town, but his debts of honour were still more formidable. Mr. Gardiner did not attempt to conceal these particulars from the Longbourn family. Jane heard them with horror. "A gamester!" she cried. "This is wholly unexpected. I had not an idea of it." 
Mr. Gardiner added in his letter, that they might expect to see their father at home on the following day, which was Saturday. Rendered spiritless by the ill-success of all their endeavours, he had yielded to his brother-in-law's entreaty that he would return to his family, and leave it to him to do whatever occasion might suggest to be advisable for continuing their pursuit. When Mrs. Bennet was told of this, she did not express so much satisfaction as her children expected, considering what her anxiety for his life had been before. 
"What, is he coming home, and without poor Lydia?" she cried. "Sure he will not leave London before he has found them. Who is to fight Wickham, and make him marry her, if he comes away?" 
As Mrs. Gardiner began to wish to be at home, it was settled that she and the children should go to London, at the same time that Mr. Bennet came from it. The coach, therefore, took them the first stage of their journey, and brought its master back to Longbourn. 
Mrs. Gardiner went away in all the perplexity about Elizabeth and her Derbyshire friend that had attended her from that part of the world. His name had never been voluntarily mentioned before them by her niece; and the kind of half-expectation which Mrs. Gardiner had formed, of their being followed by a letter from him, had ended in nothing. Elizabeth had received none since her return that could come from Pemberley. 
The present unhappy state of the family rendered any other excuse for the lowness of her spirits unnecessary; nothing, therefore, could be fairly conjectured from THAT, though Elizabeth, who was by this time tolerably well acquainted with her own feelings, was perfectly aware that, had she known nothing of Darcy, she could have borne the dread of Lydia's infamy somewhat better. It would have spared her, she thought, one sleepless night out of two. 
When Mr. Bennet arrived, he had all the appearance of his usual philosophic composure. He said as little as he had ever been in the habit of saying; made no mention of the business that had taken him away, and it was some time before his daughters had courage to speak of it. 
It was not till the afternoon, when he had joined them at tea, that Elizabeth ventured to introduce the subject; and then, on her briefly expressing her sorrow for what he must have endured, he replied, "Say nothing of that. Who should suffer but myself? It has been my own doing, and I ought to feel it." 
"You must not be too severe upon yourself," replied Elizabeth. 
"You may well warn me against such an evil. Human nature is so prone to fall into it! No, Lizzy, let me once in my life feel how much I have been to blame. I am not afraid of being overpowered by the impression. It will pass away soon enough." 
"Do you suppose them to be in London?" 
"Yes; where else can they be so well concealed?" 
"And Lydia used to want to go to London," added Kitty. 
"She is happy then," said her father drily; "and her residence there will probably be of some duration." 
Then after a short silence he continued: 
"Lizzy, I bear you no ill-will for being justified in your advice to me last May, which, considering the event, shows some greatness of mind." 
They were interrupted by Miss Bennet, who came to fetch her mother's tea. 
"This is a parade," he cried, "which does one good; it gives such an elegance to misfortune! Another day I will do the same; I will sit in my library, in my nightcap and powdering gown, and give as much trouble as I can; or, perhaps, I may defer it till Kitty runs away." 
"I am not going to run away, papa," said Kitty fretfully. "If I should ever go to Brighton, I would behave better than Lydia." 
"YOU go to Brighton. I would not trust you so near it as Eastbourne for fifty pounds! No, Kitty, I have at last learnt to be cautious, and you will feel the effects of it. No officer is ever to enter into my house again, nor even to pass through the village. Balls will be absolutely prohibited, unless you stand up with one of your sisters. And you are never to stir out of doors till you can prove that you have spent ten minutes of every day in a rational manner." 
Kitty, who took all these threats in a serious light, began to cry. 
"Well, well," said he, "do not make yourself unhappy. If you are a good girl for the next ten years, I will take you to a review at the end of them." 
Chapter 49
Two days after Mr. Bennet's return, as Jane and Elizabeth were walking together in the shrubbery behind the house, they saw the housekeeper coming towards them, and, concluding that she came to call them to their mother, went forward to meet her; but, instead of the expected summons, when they approached her, she said to Miss Bennet, "I beg your pardon, madam, for interrupting you, but I was in hopes you might have got some good news from town, so I took the liberty of coming to ask." 
"What do you mean, Hill? We have heard nothing from town." 
"Dear madam," cried Mrs. Hill, in great astonishment, "don't you know there is an express come for master from Mr. Gardiner? He has been here this half-hour, and master has had a letter." 
Away ran the girls, too eager to get in to have time for speech. They ran through the vestibule into the breakfast-room; from thence to the library; their father was in neither; and they were on the point of seeking him upstairs with their mother, when they were met by the butler, who said: 
"If you are looking for my master, ma'am, he is walking towards the little copse." 
Upon this information, they instantly passed through the hall once more, and ran across the lawn after their father, who was deliberately pursuing his way towards a small wood on one side of the paddock. 
Jane, who was not so light nor so much in the habit of running as Elizabeth, soon lagged behind, while her sister, panting for breath, came up with him, and eagerly cried out: 
"Oh, papa, what news\97what news? Have you heard from my uncle?" 
"Yes I have had a letter from him by express." 
"Well, and what news does it bring\97good or bad?" 
"What is there of good to be expected?" said he, taking the letter from his pocket. "But perhaps you would like to read it." 
Elizabeth impatiently caught it from his hand. Jane now came up. 
"Read it aloud," said their father, "for I hardly know myself what it is about." 
"Gracechurch Street, Monday, August 2. 
"MY DEAR BROTHER, 
"At last I am able to send you some tidings of my niece, and such as, upon the whole, I hope it will give you satisfaction. Soon after you left me on Saturday, I was fortunate enough to find out in what part of London they were. The particulars I reserve till we meet; it is enough to know they are discovered. I have seen them both\97" 
"Then it is as I always hoped," cried Jane; "they are married!" 
Elizabeth read on: 
"I have seen them both. They are not married, nor can I find there was any intention of being so; but if you are willing to perform the engagements which I have ventured to make on your side, I hope it will not be long before they are. All that is required of you is, to assure to your daughter, by settlement, her equal share of the five thousand pounds secured among your children after the decease of yourself and my sister; and, moreover, to enter into an engagement of allowing her, during your life, one hundred pounds per annum. These are conditions which, considering everything, I had no hesitation in complying with, as far as I thought myself privileged, for you. I shall send this by express, that no time may be lost in bringing me your answer. You will easily comprehend, from these particulars, that Mr. Wickham's circumstances are not so hopeless as they are generally believed to be. The world has been deceived in that respect; and I am happy to say there will be some little money, even when all his debts are discharged, to settle on my niece, in addition to her own fortune. If, as I conclude will be the case, you send me full powers to act in your name throughout the whole of this business, I will immediately give directions to Haggerston for preparing a proper settlement. There will not be the smallest occasion for your coming to town again; therefore stay quiet at Longbourn, and depend on my diligence and care. Send back your answer as fast as you can, and be careful to write explicitly. We have judged it best that my niece should be married from this house, of which I hope you will approve. She comes to us to-day. I shall write again as soon as anything more is determined on. Yours, etc., 
"EDW. GARDINER." 
"Is it possible?" cried Elizabeth, when she had finished. "Can it be possible that he will marry her?" 
"Wickham is not so undeserving, then, as we thought him," said her sister. "My dear father, I congratulate you." 
"And have you answered the letter?" cried Elizabeth. 
"No; but it must be done soon." 
Most earnestly did she then entreaty him to lose no more time before he wrote. 
"Oh! my dear father," she cried, "come back and write immediately. Consider how important every moment is in such a case." 
"Let me write for you," said Jane, "if you dislike the trouble yourself." 
"I dislike it very much," he replied; "but it must be done." 
And so saying, he turned back with them, and walked towards the house. 
"And may I ask\97" said Elizabeth; "but the terms, I suppose, must be complied with." 
"Complied with! I am only ashamed of his asking so little." 
"And they MUST marry! Yet he is SUCH a man!" 
"Yes, yes, they must marry. There is nothing else to be done. But there are two things that I want very much to know; one is, how much money your uncle has laid down to bring it about; and the other, how am I ever to pay him." 
"Money! My uncle!" cried Jane, "what do you mean, sir?" 
"I mean, that no man in his senses would marry Lydia on so slight a temptation as one hundred a year during my life, and fifty after I am gone." 
"That is very true," said Elizabeth; "though it had not occurred to me before. His debts to be discharged, and something still to remain! Oh! it must be my uncle's doings! Generous, good man, I am afraid he has distressed himself. A small sum could not do all this." 
"No," said her father; "Wickham's a fool if he takes her with a farthing less than ten thousand pounds. I should be sorry to think so ill of him, in the very beginning of our relationship." 
"Ten thousand pounds! Heaven forbid! How is half such a sum to be repaid?" 
Mr. Bennet made no answer, and each of them, deep in thought, continued silent till they reached the house. Their father then went on to the library to write, and the girls walked into the breakfast-room. 
"And they are really to be married!" cried Elizabeth, as soon as they were by themselves. "How strange this is! And for THIS we are to be thankful. That they should marry, small as is their chance of happiness, and wretched as is his character, we are forced to rejoice. Oh, Lydia!" 
"I comfort myself with thinking," replied Jane, "that he certainly would not marry Lydia if he had not a real regard for her. Though our kind uncle has done something towards clearing him, I cannot believe that ten thousand pounds, or anything like it, has been advanced. He has children of his own, and may have more. How could he spare half ten thousand pounds?" 
"If he were ever able to learn what Wickham's debts have been," said Elizabeth, "and how much is settled on his side on our sister, we shall exactly know what Mr. Gardiner has done for them, because Wickham has not sixpence of his own. The kindness of my uncle and aunt can never be requited. Their taking her home, and affording her their personal protection and countenance, is such a sacrifice to her advantage as years of gratitude cannot enough acknowledge. By this time she is actually with them! If such goodness does not make her miserable now, she will never deserve to be happy! What a meeting for her, when she first sees my aunt!" 
"We must endeavour to forget all that has passed on either side," said Jane: "I hope and trust they will yet be happy. His consenting to marry her is a proof, I will believe, that he is come to a right way of thinking. Their mutual affection will steady them; and I flatter myself they will settle so quietly, and live in so rational a manner, as may in time make their past imprudence forgotten." 
"Their conduct has been such," replied Elizabeth, "as neither you, nor I, nor anybody can ever forget. It is useless to talk of it." 
It now occurred to the girls that their mother was in all likelihood perfectly ignorant of what had happened. They went to the library, therefore, and asked their father whether he would not wish them to make it known to her. He was writing and, without raising his head, coolly replied: 
"Just as you please." 
"May we take my uncle's letter to read to her?" 
"Take whatever you like, and get away." 
Elizabeth took the letter from his writing-table, and they went upstairs together. Mary and Kitty were both with Mrs. Bennet: one communication would, therefore, do for all. After a slight preparation for good news, the letter was read aloud. Mrs. Bennet could hardly contain herself. As soon as Jane had read Mr. Gardiner's hope of Lydia's being soon married, her joy burst forth, and every following sentence added to its exuberance. She was now in an irritation as violent from delight, as she had ever been fidgety from alarm and vexation. To know that her daughter would be married was enough. She was disturbed by no fear for her felicity, nor humbled by any remembrance of her misconduct. 
"My dear, dear Lydia!" she cried. "This is delightful indeed! She will be married! I shall see her again! She will be married at sixteen! My good, kind brother! I knew how it would be. I knew he would manage everything! How I long to see her! and to see dear Wickham too! But the clothes, the wedding clothes! I will write to my sister Gardiner about them directly. Lizzy, my dear, run down to your father, and ask him how much he will give her. Stay, stay, I will go myself. Ring the bell, Kitty, for Hill. I will put on my things in a moment. My dear, dear Lydia! How merry we shall be together when we meet!" 
Her eldest daughter endeavoured to give some relief to the violence of these transports, by leading her thoughts to the obligations which Mr. Gardiner's behaviour laid them all under. 
"For we must attribute this happy conclusion," she added, "in a great measure to his kindness. We are persuaded that he has pledged himself to assist Mr. Wickham with money." 
"Well," cried her mother, "it is all very right; who should do it but her own uncle? If he had not had a family of his own, I and my children must have had all his money, you know; and it is the first time we have ever had anything from him, except a few presents. Well! I am so happy! In a short time I shall have a daughter married. Mrs. Wickham! How well it sounds! And she was only sixteen last June. My dear Jane, I am in such a flutter, that I am sure I can't write; so I will dictate, and you write for me. We will settle with your father about the money afterwards; but the things should be ordered immediately." 
She was then proceeding to all the particulars of calico, muslin, and cambric, and would shortly have dictated some very plentiful orders, had not Jane, though with some difficulty, persuaded her to wait till her father was at leisure to be consulted. One day's delay, she observed, would be of small importance; and her mother was too happy to be quite so obstinate as usual. Other schemes, too, came into her head. 
"I will go to Meryton," said she, "as soon as I am dressed, and tell the good, good news to my sister Philips. And as I come back, I can call on Lady Lucas and Mrs. Long. Kitty, run down and order the carriage. An airing would do me a great deal of good, I am sure. Girls, can I do anything for you in Meryton? Oh! Here comes Hill! My dear Hill, have you heard the good news? Miss Lydia is going to be married; and you shall all have a bowl of punch to make merry at her wedding." 
Mrs. Hill began instantly to express her joy. Elizabeth received her congratulations amongst the rest, and then, sick of this folly, took refuge in her own room, that she might think with freedom. 
Poor Lydia's situation must, at best, be bad enough; but that it was no worse, she had need to be thankful. She felt it so; and though, in looking forward, neither rational happiness nor worldly prosperity could be justly expected for her sister, in looking back to what they had feared, only two hours ago, she felt all the advantages of what they had gained. 
Chapter 50
Mr. Bennet had very often wished before this period of his life that, instead of spending his whole income, he had laid by an annual sum for the better provision of his children, and of his wife, if she survived him. He now wished it more than ever. Had he done his duty in that respect, Lydia need not have been indebted to her uncle for whatever of honour or credit could now be purchased for her. The satisfaction of prevailing on one of the most worthless young men in Great Britain to be her husband might then have rested in its proper place. 
He was seriously concerned that a cause of so little advantage to anyone should be forwarded at the sole expense of his brother-in-law, and he was determined, if possible, to find out the extent of his assistance, and to discharge the obligation as soon as he could. 
When first Mr. Bennet had married, economy was held to be perfectly useless, for, of course, they were to have a son. The son was to join in cutting off the entail, as soon as he should be of age, and the widow and younger children would by that means be provided for. Five daughters successively entered the world, but yet the son was to come; and Mrs. Bennet, for many years after Lydia's birth, had been certain that he would. This event had at last been despaired of, but it was then too late to be saving. Mrs. Bennet had no turn for economy, and her husband's love of independence had alone prevented their exceeding their income. 
Five thousand pounds was settled by marriage articles on Mrs. Bennet and the children. But in what proportions it should be divided amongst the latter depended on the will of the parents. This was one point, with regard to Lydia, at least, which was now to be settled, and Mr. Bennet could have no hesitation in acceding to the proposal before him. In terms of grateful acknowledgment for the kindness of his brother, though expressed most concisely, he then delivered on paper his perfect approbation of all that was done, and his willingness to fulfil the engagements that had been made for him. He had never before supposed that, could Wickham be prevailed on to marry his daughter, it would be done with so little inconvenience to himself as by the present arrangement. He would scarcely be ten pounds a year the loser by the hundred that was to be paid them; for, what with her board and pocket allowance, and the continual presents in money which passed to her through her mother's hands, Lydia's expenses had been very little within that sum. 
That it would be done with such trifling exertion on his side, too, was another very welcome surprise; for his wish at present was to have as little trouble in the business as possible. When the first transports of rage which had produced his activity in seeking her were over, he naturally returned to all his former indolence. His letter was soon dispatched; for, though dilatory in undertaking business, he was quick in its execution. He begged to know further particulars of what he was indebted to his brother, but was too angry with Lydia to send any message to her. 
The good news spread quickly through the house, and with proportionate speed through the neighbourhood. It was borne in the latter with decent philosophy. To be sure, it would have been more for the advantage of conversation had Miss Lydia Bennet come upon the town; or, as the happiest alternative, been secluded from the world, in some distant farmhouse. But there was much to be talked of in marrying her; and the good-natured wishes for her well-doing which had proceeded before from all the spiteful old ladies in Meryton lost but a little of their spirit in this change of circumstances, because with such an husband her misery was considered certain. 
It was a fortnight since Mrs. Bennet had been downstairs; but on this happy day she again took her seat at the head of her table, and in spirits oppressively high. No sentiment of shame gave a damp to her triumph. The marriage of a daughter, which had been the first object of her wishes since Jane was sixteen, was now on the point of accomplishment, and her thoughts and her words ran wholly on those attendants of elegant nuptials, fine muslins, new carriages, and servants. She was busily searching through the neighbourhood for a proper situation for her daughter, and, without knowing or considering what their income might be, rejected many as deficient in size and importance. 
"Haye Park might do," said she, "if the Gouldings could quit it\97or the great house at Stoke, if the drawing-room were larger; but Ashworth is too far off! I could not bear to have her ten miles from me; and as for Pulvis Lodge, the attics are dreadful." 
Her husband allowed her to talk on without interruption while the servants remained. But when they had withdrawn, he said to her: "Mrs. Bennet, before you take any or all of these houses for your son and daughter, let us come to a right understanding. Into ONE house in this neighbourhood they shall never have admittance. I will not encourage the impudence of either, by receiving them at Longbourn." 
A long dispute followed this declaration; but Mr. Bennet was firm. It soon led to another; and Mrs. Bennet found, with amazement and horror, that her husband would not advance a guinea to buy clothes for his daughter. He protested that she should receive from him no mark of affection whatever on the occasion. Mrs. Bennet could hardly comprehend it. That his anger could be carried to such a point of inconceivable resentment as to refuse his daughter a privilege without which her marriage would scarcely seem valid, exceeded all she could believe possible. She was more alive to the disgrace which her want of new clothes must reflect on her daughter's nuptials, than to any sense of shame at her eloping and living with Wickham a fortnight before they took place. 
Elizabeth was now most heartily sorry that she had, from the distress of the moment, been led to make Mr. Darcy acquainted with their fears for her sister; for since her marriage would so shortly give the proper termination to the elopement, they might hope to conceal its unfavourable beginning from all those who were not immediately on the spot. 
She had no fear of its spreading farther through his means. There were few people on whose secrecy she would have more confidently depended; but, at the same time, there was no one whose knowledge of a sister's frailty would have mortified her so much\97not, however, from any fear of disadvantage from it individually to herself, for, at any rate, there seemed a gulf impassable between them. Had Lydia's marriage been concluded on the most honourable terms, it was not to be supposed that Mr. Darcy would connect himself with a family where, to every other objection, would now be added an alliance and relationship of the nearest kind with a man whom he so justly scorned. 
From such a connection she could not wonder that he would shrink. The wish of procuring her regard, which she had assured herself of his feeling in Derbyshire, could not in rational expectation survive such a blow as this. She was humbled, she was grieved; she repented, though she hardly knew of what. She became jealous of his esteem, when she could no longer hope to be benefited by it. She wanted to hear of him, when there seemed the least chance of gaining intelligence. She was convinced that she could have been happy with him, when it was no longer likely they should meet. 
What a triumph for him, as she often thought, could he know that the proposals which she had proudly spurned only four months ago, would now have been most gladly and gratefully received! He was as generous, she doubted not, as the most generous of his sex; but while he was mortal, there must be a triumph. 
She began now to comprehend that he was exactly the man who, in disposition and talents, would most suit her. His understanding and temper, though unlike her own, would have answered all her wishes. It was an union that must have been to the advantage of both; by her ease and liveliness, his mind might have been softened, his manners improved; and from his judgement, information, and knowledge of the world, she must have received benefit of greater importance. 
But no such happy marriage could now teach the admiring multitude what connubial felicity really was. An union of a different tendency, and precluding the possibility of the other, was soon to be formed in their family. 
How Wickham and Lydia were to be supported in tolerable independence, she could not imagine. But how little of permanent happiness could belong to a couple who were only brought together because their passions were stronger than their virtue, she could easily conjecture. 
* * * * * 
Mr. Gardiner soon wrote again to his brother. To Mr. Bennet's acknowledgments he briefly replied, with assurance of his eagerness to promote the welfare of any of his family; and concluded with entreaties that the subject might never be mentioned to him again. The principal purport of his letter was to inform them that Mr. Wickham had resolved on quitting the militia. 
"It was greatly my wish that he should do so," he added, "as soon as his marriage was fixed on. And I think you will agree with me, in considering the removal from that corps as highly advisable, both on his account and my niece's. It is Mr. Wickham's intention to go into the regulars; and among his former friends, there are still some who are able and willing to assist him in the army. He has the promise of an ensigncy in General \97\97's regiment, now quartered in the North. It is an advantage to have it so far from this part of the kingdom. He promises fairly; and I hope among different people, where they may each have a character to preserve, they will both be more prudent. I have written to Colonel Forster, to inform him of our present arrangements, and to request that he will satisfy the various creditors of Mr. Wickham in and near Brighton, with assurances of speedy payment, for which I have pledged myself. And will you give yourself the trouble of carrying similar assurances to his creditors in Meryton, of whom I shall subjoin a list according to his information? He has given in all his debts; I hope at least he has not deceived us. Haggerston has our directions, and all will be completed in a week. They will then join his regiment, unless they are first invited to Longbourn; and I understand from Mrs. Gardiner, that my niece is very desirous of seeing you all before she leaves the South. She is well, and begs to be dutifully remembered to you and your mother.\97Yours, etc., 
"E. GARDINER." 
Mr. Bennet and his daughters saw all the advantages of Wickham's removal from the \97\97shire as clearly as Mr. Gardiner could do. But Mrs. Bennet was not so well pleased with it. Lydia's being settled in the North, just when she had expected most pleasure and pride in her company, for she had by no means given up her plan of their residing in Hertfordshire, was a severe disappointment; and, besides, it was such a pity that Lydia should be taken from a regiment where she was acquainted with everybody, and had so many favourites. 
"She is so fond of Mrs. Forster," said she, "it will be quite shocking to send her away! And there are several of the young men, too, that she likes very much. The officers may not be so pleasant in General\97\97's regiment." 
His daughter's request, for such it might be considered, of being admitted into her family again before she set off for the North, received at first an absolute negative. But Jane and Elizabeth, who agreed in wishing, for the sake of their sister's feelings and consequence, that she should be noticed on her marriage by her parents, urged him so earnestly yet so rationally and so mildly, to receive her and her husband at Longbourn, as soon as they were married, that he was prevailed on to think as they thought, and act as they wished. And their mother had the satisfaction of knowing that she would be able to show her married daughter in the neighbourhood before she was banished to the North. When Mr. Bennet wrote again to his brother, therefore, he sent his permission for them to come; and it was settled, that as soon as the ceremony was over, they should proceed to Longbourn. Elizabeth was surprised, however, that Wickham should consent to such a scheme, and had she consulted only her own inclination, any meeting with him would have been the last object of her wishes. 
Chapter 51
Their sister's wedding day arrived; and Jane and Elizabeth felt for her probably more than she felt for herself. The carriage was sent to meet them at \97\97, and they were to return in it by dinner-time. Their arrival was dreaded by the elder Miss Bennets, and Jane more especially, who gave Lydia the feelings which would have attended herself, had she been the culprit, and was wretched in the thought of what her sister must endure. 
They came. The family were assembled in the breakfast room to receive them. Smiles decked the face of Mrs. Bennet as the carriage drove up to the door; her husband looked impenetrably grave; her daughters, alarmed, anxious, uneasy. 
Lydia's voice was heard in the vestibule; the door was thrown open, and she ran into the room. Her mother stepped forwards, embraced her, and welcomed her with rapture; gave her hand, with an affectionate smile, to Wickham, who followed his lady; and wished them both joy with an alacrity which shewed no doubt of their happiness. 
Their reception from Mr. Bennet, to whom they then turned, was not quite so cordial. His countenance rather gained in austerity; and he scarcely opened his lips. The easy assurance of the young couple, indeed, was enough to provoke him. Elizabeth was disgusted, and even Miss Bennet was shocked. Lydia was Lydia still; untamed, unabashed, wild, noisy, and fearless. She turned from sister to sister, demanding their congratulations; and when at length they all sat down, looked eagerly round the room, took notice of some little alteration in it, and observed, with a laugh, that it was a great while since she had been there. 
Wickham was not at all more distressed than herself, but his manners were always so pleasing, that had his character and his marriage been exactly what they ought, his smiles and his easy address, while he claimed their relationship, would have delighted them all. Elizabeth had not before believed him quite equal to such assurance; but she sat down, resolving within herself to draw no limits in future to the impudence of an impudent man. She blushed, and Jane blushed; but the cheeks of the two who caused their confusion suffered no variation of colour. 
There was no want of discourse. The bride and her mother could neither of them talk fast enough; and Wickham, who happened to sit near Elizabeth, began inquiring after his acquaintance in that neighbourhood, with a good humoured ease which she felt very unable to equal in her replies. They seemed each of them to have the happiest memories in the world. Nothing of the past was recollected with pain; and Lydia led voluntarily to subjects which her sisters would not have alluded to for the world. 
"Only think of its being three months," she cried, "since I went away; it seems but a fortnight I declare; and yet there have been things enough happened in the time. Good gracious! when I went away, I am sure I had no more idea of being married till I came back again! though I thought it would be very good fun if I was." 
Her father lifted up his eyes. Jane was distressed. Elizabeth looked expressively at Lydia; but she, who never heard nor saw any thing of which she chose to be insensible, gaily continued, "Oh! mamma, do the people here abouts know I am married to-day? I was afraid they might not; and we overtook William Goulding in his curricle, so I was determined he should know it, and so I let down the side-glass next to him, and took off my glove, and let my hand just rest upon the window frame, so that he might see the ring, and then I bowed and smiled like any thing." 
Elizabeth could bear it no longer. She got up, and ran out of the room; and returned no more, till she heard them passing through the hall to the dining parlour. She then joined them soon enough to see Lydia, with anxious parade, walk up to her mother's right hand, and hear her say to her eldest sister, "Ah! Jane, I take your place now, and you must go lower, because I am a married woman." 
It was not to be supposed that time would give Lydia that embarrassment from which she had been so wholly free at first. Her ease and good spirits increased. She longed to see Mrs. Phillips, the Lucases, and all their other neighbours, and to hear herself called "Mrs. Wickham" by each of them; and in the mean time, she went after dinner to show her ring, and boast of being married, to Mrs. Hill and the two housemaids. 
"Well, mamma," said she, when they were all returned to the breakfast room, "and what do you think of my husband? Is not he a charming man? I am sure my sisters must all envy me. I only hope they may have half my good luck. They must all go to Brighton. That is the place to get husbands. What a pity it is, mamma, we did not all go." 
"Very true; and if I had my will, we should. But my dear Lydia, I don't at all like your going such a way off. Must it be so?" 
"Oh, lord! yes;\97there is nothing in that. I shall like it of all things. You and papa, and my sisters, must come down and see us. We shall be at Newcastle all the winter, and I dare say there will be some balls, and I will take care to get good partners for them all." 
"I should like it beyond any thing!" said her mother. 
"And then when you go away, you may leave one or two of my sisters behind you; and I dare say I shall get husbands for them before the winter is over." 
"I thank you for my share of the favour," said Elizabeth; "but I do not particularly like your way of getting husbands." 
Their visitors were not to remain above ten days with them. Mr. Wickham had received his commission before he left London, and he was to join his regiment at the end of a fortnight. 
No one but Mrs. Bennet regretted that their stay would be so short; and she made the most of the time by visiting about with her daughter, and having very frequent parties at home. These parties were acceptable to all; to avoid a family circle was even more desirable to such as did think, than such as did not. 
Wickham's affection for Lydia was just what Elizabeth had expected to find it; not equal to Lydia's for him. She had scarcely needed her present observation to be satisfied, from the reason of things, that their elopement had been brought on by the strength of her love, rather than by his; and she would have wondered why, without violently caring for her, he chose to elope with her at all, had she not felt certain that his flight was rendered necessary by distress of circumstances; and if that were the case, he was not the young man to resist an opportunity of having a companion. 
Lydia was exceedingly fond of him. He was her dear Wickham on every occasion; no one was to be put in competition with him. He did every thing best in the world; and she was sure he would kill more birds on the first of September, than any body else in the country. 
One morning, soon after their arrival, as she was sitting with her two elder sisters, she said to Elizabeth: 
"Lizzy, I never gave YOU an account of my wedding, I believe. You were not by, when I told mamma and the others all about it. Are not you curious to hear how it was managed?" 
"No really," replied Elizabeth; "I think there cannot be too little said on the subject." 
"La! You are so strange! But I must tell you how it went off. We were married, you know, at St. Clement's, because Wickham's lodgings were in that parish. And it was settled that we should all be there by eleven o'clock. My uncle and aunt and I were to go together; and the others were to meet us at the church. Well, Monday morning came, and I was in such a fuss! I was so afraid, you know, that something would happen to put it off, and then I should have gone quite distracted. And there was my aunt, all the time I was dressing, preaching and talking away just as if she was reading a sermon. However, I did not hear above one word in ten, for I was thinking, you may suppose, of my dear Wickham. I longed to know whether he would be married in his blue coat." 
"Well, and so we breakfasted at ten as usual; I thought it would never be over; for, by the bye, you are to understand, that my uncle and aunt were horrid unpleasant all the time I was with them. If you'll believe me, I did not once put my foot out of doors, though I was there a fortnight. Not one party, or scheme, or any thing. To be sure London was rather thin, but, however, the Little Theatre was open. Well, and so just as the carriage came to the door, my uncle was called away upon business to that horrid man Mr. Stone. And then, you know, when once they get together, there is no end of it. Well, I was so frightened I did not know what to do, for my uncle was to give me away; and if we were beyond the hour, we could not be married all day. But, luckily, he came back again in ten minutes' time, and then we all set out. However, I recollected afterwards that if he had been prevented going, the wedding need not be put off, for Mr. Darcy might have done as well." 
"Mr. Darcy!" repeated Elizabeth, in utter amazement. 
"Oh, yes!\97he was to come there with Wickham, you know. But gracious me! I quite forgot! I ought not to have said a word about it. I promised them so faithfully! What will Wickham say? It was to be such a secret!" 
"If it was to be secret," said Jane, "say not another word on the subject. You may depend upon my seeking no further." 
"Oh! certainly," said Elizabeth, though burning with curiosity; "we will ask you no questions." 
"Thank you," said Lydia, "for if you did, I should certainly tell you all, and then Wickham would be angry." 
On such encouragement to ask, Elizabeth was forced to put it out of her power, by running away. 
But to live in ignorance on such a point was impossible; or at least it was impossible not to try for information. Mr. Darcy had been at her sister's wedding. It was exactly a scene, and exactly among people, where he had apparently least to do, and least temptation to go. Conjectures as to the meaning of it, rapid and wild, hurried into her brain; but she was satisfied with none. Those that best pleased her, as placing his conduct in the noblest light, seemed most improbable. She could not bear such suspense; and hastily seizing a sheet of paper, wrote a short letter to her aunt, to request an explanation of what Lydia had dropt, if it were compatible with the secrecy which had been intended. 
"You may readily comprehend," she added, "what my curiosity must be to know how a person unconnected with any of us, and (comparatively speaking) a stranger to our family, should have been amongst you at such a time. Pray write instantly, and let me understand it\97unless it is, for very cogent reasons, to remain in the secrecy which Lydia seems to think necessary; and then I must endeavour to be satisfied with ignorance." 
"Not that I SHALL, though," she added to herself, as she finished the letter; "and my dear aunt, if you do not tell me in an honourable manner, I shall certainly be reduced to tricks and stratagems to find it out." 
Jane's delicate sense of honour would not allow her to speak to Elizabeth privately of what Lydia had let fall; Elizabeth was glad of it;\97till it appeared whether her inquiries would receive any satisfaction, she had rather be without a confidante. 
Chapter 52
Elizabeth had the satisfaction of receiving an answer to her letter as soon as she possibly could. She was no sooner in possession of it than, hurrying into the little copse, where she was least likely to be interrupted, she sat down on one of the benches and prepared to be happy; for the length of the letter convinced her that it did not contain a denial. 
"Gracechurch street, Sept. 6. 
"MY DEAR NIECE, 
"I have just received your letter, and shall devote this whole morning to answering it, as I foresee that a LITTLE writing will not comprise what I have to tell you. I must confess myself surprised by your application; I did not expect it from YOU. Don't think me angry, however, for I only mean to let you know that I had not imagined such inquiries to be necessary on YOUR side. If you do not choose to understand me, forgive my impertinence. Your uncle is as much surprised as I am\97and nothing but the belief of your being a party concerned would have allowed him to act as he has done. But if you are really innocent and ignorant, I must be more explicit. On the very day of my coming home from Longbourn, your uncle had a most unexpected visitor. Mr. Darcy called, and was shut up with him several hours. It was all over before I arrived; so my curiosity was not so dreadfully racked as YOUR'S seems to have been. He came to tell Mr. Gardiner that he had found out where your sister and Mr. Wickham were, and that he had seen and talked with them both; Wickham repeatedly, Lydia once. From what I can collect, he left Derbyshire only one day after ourselves, and came to town with the resolution of hunting for them. The motive professed was his conviction of its being owing to himself that Wickham's worthlessness had not been so well known as to make it impossible for any young woman of character to love or confide in him. He generously imputed the whole to his mistaken pride, and confessed that he had before thought it beneath him to lay his private actions open to the world. His character was to speak for itself. He called it, therefore, his duty to step forward, and endeavour to remedy an evil which had been brought on by himself. If he HAD ANOTHER motive, I am sure it would never disgrace him. He had been some days in town, before he was able to discover them; but he had something to direct his search, which was more than WE had; and the consciousness of this was another reason for his resolving to follow us. There is a lady, it seems, a Mrs. Younge, who was some time ago governess to Miss Darcy, and was dismissed from her charge on some cause of disapprobation, though he did not say what. She then took a large house in Edward-street, and has since maintained herself by letting lodgings. This Mrs. Younge was, he knew, intimately acquainted with Wickham; and he went to her for intelligence of him as soon as he got to town. But it was two or three days before he could get from her what he wanted. She would not betray her trust, I suppose, without bribery and corruption, for she really did know where her friend was to be found. Wickham indeed had gone to her on their first arrival in London, and had she been able to receive them into her house, they would have taken up their abode with her. At length, however, our kind friend procured the wished-for direction. They were in \97\97 street. He saw Wickham, and afterwards insisted on seeing Lydia. His first object with her, he acknowledged, had been to persuade her to quit her present disgraceful situation, and return to her friends as soon as they could be prevailed on to receive her, offering his assistance, as far as it would go. But he found Lydia absolutely resolved on remaining where she was. She cared for none of her friends; she wanted no help of his; she would not hear of leaving Wickham. She was sure they should be married some time or other, and it did not much signify when. Since such were her feelings, it only remained, he thought, to secure and expedite a marriage, which, in his very first conversation with Wickham, he easily learnt had never been HIS design. He confessed himself obliged to leave the regiment, on account of some debts of honour, which were very pressing; and scrupled not to lay all the ill-consequences of Lydia's flight on her own folly alone. He meant to resign his commission immediately; and as to his future situation, he could conjecture very little about it. He must go somewhere, but he did not know where, and he knew he should have nothing to live on. Mr. Darcy asked him why he had not married your sister at once. Though Mr. Bennet was not imagined to be very rich, he would have been able to do something for him, and his situation must have been benefited by marriage. But he found, in reply to this question, that Wickham still cherished the hope of more effectually making his fortune by marriage in some other country. Under such circumstances, however, he was not likely to be proof against the temptation of immediate relief. They met several times, for there was much to be discussed. Wickham of course wanted more than he could get; but at length was reduced to be reasonable. Every thing being settled between THEM, Mr. Darcy's next step was to make your uncle acquainted with it, and he first called in Gracechurch street the evening before I came home. But Mr. Gardiner could not be seen, and Mr. Darcy found, on further inquiry, that your father was still with him, but would quit town the next morning. He did not judge your father to be a person whom he could so properly consult as your uncle, and therefore readily postponed seeing him till after the departure of the former. He did not leave his name, and till the next day it was only known that a gentleman had called on business. On Saturday he came again. Your father was gone, your uncle at home, and, as I said before, they had a great deal of talk together. They met again on Sunday, and then I saw him too. It was not all settled before Monday: as soon as it was, the express was sent off to Longbourn. But our visitor was very obstinate. I fancy, Lizzy, that obstinacy is the real defect of his character, after all. He has been accused of many faults at different times, but THIS is the true one. Nothing was to be done that he did not do himself; though I am sure (and I do not speak it to be thanked, therefore say nothing about it), your uncle would most readily have settled the whole. They battled it together for a long time, which was more than either the gentleman or lady concerned in it deserved. But at last your uncle was forced to yield, and instead of being allowed to be of use to his niece, was forced to put up with only having the probable credit of it, which went sorely against the grain; and I really believe your letter this morning gave him great pleasure, because it required an explanation that would rob him of his borrowed feathers, and give the praise where it was due. But, Lizzy, this must go no farther than yourself, or Jane at most. You know pretty well, I suppose, what has been done for the young people. His debts are to be paid, amounting, I believe, to considerably more than a thousand pounds, another thousand in addition to her own settled upon HER, and his commission purchased. The reason why all this was to be done by him alone, was such as I have given above. It was owing to him, to his reserve and want of proper consideration, that Wickham's character had been so misunderstood, and consequently that he had been received and noticed as he was. Perhaps there was some truth in THIS; though I doubt whether HIS reserve, or ANYBODY'S reserve, can be answerable for the event. But in spite of all this fine talking, my dear Lizzy, you may rest perfectly assured that your uncle would never have yielded, if we had not given him credit for ANOTHER INTEREST in the affair. When all this was resolved on, he returned again to his friends, who were still staying at Pemberley; but it was agreed that he should be in London once more when the wedding took place, and all money matters were then to receive the last finish. I believe I have now told you every thing. It is a relation which you tell me is to give you great surprise; I hope at least it will not afford you any displeasure. Lydia came to us; and Wickham had constant admission to the house. HE was exactly what he had been, when I knew him in Hertfordshire; but I would not tell you how little I was satisfied with her behaviour while she staid with us, if I had not perceived, by Jane's letter last Wednesday, that her conduct on coming home was exactly of a piece with it, and therefore what I now tell you can give you no fresh pain. I talked to her repeatedly in the most serious manner, representing to her all the wickedness of what she had done, and all the unhappiness she had brought on her family. If she heard me, it was by good luck, for I am sure she did not listen. I was sometimes quite provoked, but then I recollected my dear Elizabeth and Jane, and for their sakes had patience with her. Mr. Darcy was punctual in his return, and as Lydia informed you, attended the wedding. He dined with us the next day, and was to leave town again on Wednesday or Thursday. Will you be very angry with me, my dear Lizzy, if I take this opportunity of saying (what I was never bold enough to say before) how much I like him. His behaviour to us has, in every respect, been as pleasing as when we were in Derbyshire. His understanding and opinions all please me; he wants nothing but a little more liveliness, and THAT, if he marry PRUDENTLY, his wife may teach him. I thought him very sly;\97he hardly ever mentioned your name. But slyness seems the fashion. Pray forgive me if I have been very presuming, or at least do not punish me so far as to exclude me from P. I shall never be quite happy till I have been all round the park. A low phaeton, with a nice little pair of ponies, would be the very thing. But I must write no more. The children have been wanting me this half hour. Yours, very sincerely, 
"M. GARDINER." 
The contents of this letter threw Elizabeth into a flutter of spirits, in which it was difficult to determine whether pleasure or pain bore the greatest share. The vague and unsettled suspicions which uncertainty had produced of what Mr. Darcy might have been doing to forward her sister's match, which she had feared to encourage as an exertion of goodness too great to be probable, and at the same time dreaded to be just, from the pain of obligation, were proved beyond their greatest extent to be true! He had followed them purposely to town, he had taken on himself all the trouble and mortification attendant on such a research; in which supplication had been necessary to a woman whom he must abominate and despise, and where he was reduced to meet, frequently meet, reason with, persuade, and finally bribe, the man whom he always most wished to avoid, and whose very name it was punishment to him to pronounce. He had done all this for a girl whom he could neither regard nor esteem. Her heart did whisper that he had done it for her. But it was a hope shortly checked by other considerations, and she soon felt that even her vanity was insufficient, when required to depend on his affection for her \97for a woman who had already refused him\97as able to overcome a sentiment so natural as abhorrence against relationship with Wickham. Brother-in-law of Wickham! Every kind of pride must revolt from the connection. He had, to be sure, done much. She was ashamed to think how much. But he had given a reason for his interference, which asked no extraordinary stretch of belief. It was reasonable that he should feel he had been wrong; he had liberality, and he had the means of exercising it; and though she would not place herself as his principal inducement, she could, perhaps, believe that remaining partiality for her might assist his endeavours in a cause where her peace of mind must be materially concerned. It was painful, exceedingly painful, to know that they were under obligations to a person who could never receive a return. They owed the restoration of Lydia, her character, every thing, to him. Oh! how heartily did she grieve over every ungracious sensation she had ever encouraged, every saucy speech she had ever directed towards him. For herself she was humbled; but she was proud of him. Proud that in a cause of compassion and honour, he had been able to get the better of himself. She read over her aunt's commendation of him again and again. It was hardly enough; but it pleased her. She was even sensible of some pleasure, though mixed with regret, on finding how steadfastly both she and her uncle had been persuaded that affection and confidence subsisted between Mr. Darcy and herself. 
She was roused from her seat, and her reflections, by some one's approach; and before she could strike into another path, she was overtaken by Wickham. 
"I am afraid I interrupt your solitary ramble, my dear sister?" said he, as he joined her. 
"You certainly do," she replied with a smile; "but it does not follow that the interruption must be unwelcome." 
"I should be sorry indeed, if it were. We were always good friends; and now we are better." 
"True. Are the others coming out?" 
"I do not know. Mrs. Bennet and Lydia are going in the carriage to Meryton. And so, my dear sister, I find, from our uncle and aunt, that you have actually seen Pemberley." 
She replied in the affirmative. 
"I almost envy you the pleasure, and yet I believe it would be too much for me, or else I could take it in my way to Newcastle. And you saw the old housekeeper, I suppose? Poor Reynolds, she was always very fond of me. But of course she did not mention my name to you." 
"Yes, she did." 
"And what did she say?" 
"That you were gone into the army, and she was afraid had \97not turned out well. At such a distance as THAT, you know, things are strangely misrepresented." 
"Certainly," he replied, biting his lips. Elizabeth hoped she had silenced him; but he soon afterwards said: 
"I was surprised to see Darcy in town last month. We passed each other several times. I wonder what he can be doing there." 
"Perhaps preparing for his marriage with Miss de Bourgh," said Elizabeth. "It must be something particular, to take him there at this time of year." 
"Undoubtedly. Did you see him while you were at Lambton? I thought I understood from the Gardiners that you had." 
"Yes; he introduced us to his sister." 
"And do you like her?" 
"Very much." 
"I have heard, indeed, that she is uncommonly improved within this year or two. When I last saw her, she was not very promising. I am very glad you liked her. I hope she will turn out well." 
"I dare say she will; she has got over the most trying age." 
"Did you go by the village of Kympton?" 
"I do not recollect that we did." 
"I mention it, because it is the living which I ought to have had. A most delightful place!\97Excellent Parsonage House! It would have suited me in every respect." 
"How should you have liked making sermons?" 
"Exceedingly well. I should have considered it as part of my duty, and the exertion would soon have been nothing. One ought not to repine;\97but, to be sure, it would have been such a thing for me! The quiet, the retirement of such a life would have answered all my ideas of happiness! But it was not to be. Did you ever hear Darcy mention the circumstance, when you were in Kent?" 
"I have heard from authority, which I thought AS GOOD, that it was left you conditionally only, and at the will of the present patron." 
"You have. Yes, there was something in THAT; I told you so from the first, you may remember." 
"I DID hear, too, that there was a time, when sermon-making was not so palatable to you as it seems to be at present; that you actually declared your resolution of never taking orders, and that the business had been compromised accordingly." 
"You did! and it was not wholly without foundation. You may remember what I told you on that point, when first we talked of it." 
They were now almost at the door of the house, for she had walked fast to get rid of him; and unwilling, for her sister's sake, to provoke him, she only said in reply, with a good-humoured smile: 
"Come, Mr. Wickham, we are brother and sister, you know. Do not let us quarrel about the past. In future, I hope we shall be always of one mind." 
She held out her hand; he kissed it with affectionate gallantry, though he hardly knew how to look, and they entered the house. 
Chapter 53
Mr. Wickham was so perfectly satisfied with this conversation that he never again distressed himself, or provoked his dear sister Elizabeth, by introducing the subject of it; and she was pleased to find that she had said enough to keep him quiet. 
The day of his and Lydia's departure soon came, and Mrs. Bennet was forced to submit to a separation, which, as her husband by no means entered into her scheme of their all going to Newcastle, was likely to continue at least a twelvemonth. 
"Oh! my dear Lydia," she cried, "when shall we meet again?" 
"Oh, lord! I don't know. Not these two or three years, perhaps." 
"Write to me very often, my dear." 
"As often as I can. But you know married women have never much time for writing. My sisters may write to ME. They will have nothing else to do." 
Mr. Wickham's adieus were much more affectionate than his wife's. He smiled, looked handsome, and said many pretty things. 
"He is as fine a fellow," said Mr. Bennet, as soon as they were out of the house, "as ever I saw. He simpers, and smirks, and makes love to us all. I am prodigiously proud of him. I defy even Sir William Lucas himself to produce a more valuable son-in-law." 
The loss of her daughter made Mrs. Bennet very dull for several days. 
"I often think," said she, "that there is nothing so bad as parting with one's friends. One seems so forlorn without them." 
"This is the consequence, you see, Madam, of marrying a daughter," said Elizabeth. "It must make you better satisfied that your other four are single." 
"It is no such thing. Lydia does not leave me because she is married, but only because her husband's regiment happens to be so far off. If that had been nearer, she would not have gone so soon." 
But the spiritless condition which this event threw her into was shortly relieved, and her mind opened again to the agitation of hope, by an article of news which then began to be in circulation. The housekeeper at Netherfield had received orders to prepare for the arrival of her master, who was coming down in a day or two, to shoot there for several weeks. Mrs. Bennet was quite in the fidgets. She looked at Jane, and smiled and shook her head by turns. 
"Well, well, and so Mr. Bingley is coming down, sister," (for Mrs. Phillips first brought her the news). "Well, so much the better. Not that I care about it, though. He is nothing to us, you know, and I am sure I never want to see him again. But, however, he is very welcome to come to Netherfield, if he likes it. And who knows what MAY happen? But that is nothing to us. You know, sister, we agreed long ago never to mention a word about it. And so, is it quite certain he is coming?" 
"You may depend on it," replied the other, "for Mrs. Nicholls was in Meryton last night; I saw her passing by, and went out myself on purpose to know the truth of it; and she told me that it was certain true. He comes down on Thursday at the latest, very likely on Wednesday. She was going to the butcher's, she told me, on purpose to order in some meat on Wednesday, and she has got three couple of ducks just fit to be killed." 
Miss Bennet had not been able to hear of his coming without changing colour. It was many months since she had mentioned his name to Elizabeth; but now, as soon as they were alone together, she said: 
"I saw you look at me to-day, Lizzy, when my aunt told us of the present report; and I know I appeared distressed. But don't imagine it was from any silly cause. I was only confused for the moment, because I felt that I SHOULD be looked at. I do assure you that the news does not affect me either with pleasure or pain. I am glad of one thing, that he comes alone; because we shall see the less of him. Not that I am afraid of MYSELF, but I dread other people's remarks." 
Elizabeth did not know what to make of it. Had she not seen him in Derbyshire, she might have supposed him capable of coming there with no other view than what was acknowledged; but she still thought him partial to Jane, and she wavered as to the greater probability of his coming there WITH his friend's permission, or being bold enough to come without it. 
"Yet it is hard," she sometimes thought, "that this poor man cannot come to a house which he has legally hired, without raising all this speculation! I WILL leave him to himself." 
In spite of what her sister declared, and really believed to be her feelings in the expectation of his arrival, Elizabeth could easily perceive that her spirits were affected by it. They were more disturbed, more unequal, than she had often seen them. 
The subject which had been so warmly canvassed between their parents, about a twelvemonth ago, was now brought forward again. 
"As soon as ever Mr. Bingley comes, my dear," said Mrs. Bennet, "you will wait on him of course." 
"No, no. You forced me into visiting him last year, and promised, if I went to see him, he should marry one of my daughters. But it ended in nothing, and I will not be sent on a fool's errand again." 
His wife represented to him how absolutely necessary such an attention would be from all the neighbouring gentlemen, on his returning to Netherfield. 
"'Tis an etiquette I despise," said he. "If he wants our society, let him seek it. He knows where we live. I will not spend my hours in running after my neighbours every time they go away and come back again." 
"Well, all I know is, that it will be abominably rude if you do not wait on him. But, however, that shan't prevent my asking him to dine here, I am determined. We must have Mrs. Long and the Gouldings soon. That will make thirteen with ourselves, so there will be just room at table for him." 
Consoled by this resolution, she was the better able to bear her husband's incivility; though it was very mortifying to know that her neighbours might all see Mr. Bingley, in consequence of it, before THEY did. As the day of his arrival drew near: 
"I begin to be sorry that he comes at all," said Jane to her sister. "It would be nothing; I could see him with perfect indifference, but I can hardly bear to hear it thus perpetually talked of. My mother means well; but she does not know, no one can know, how much I suffer from what she says. Happy shall I be, when his stay at Netherfield is over!" 
"I wish I could say any thing to comfort you," replied Elizabeth; "but it is wholly out of my power. You must feel it; and the usual satisfaction of preaching patience to a sufferer is denied me, because you have always so much." 
Mr. Bingley arrived. Mrs. Bennet, through the assistance of servants, contrived to have the earliest tidings of it, that the period of anxiety and fretfulness on her side might be as long as it could. She counted the days that must intervene before their invitation could be sent; hopeless of seeing him before. But on the third morning after his arrival in Hertfordshire, she saw him, from her dressing-room window, enter the paddock and ride towards the house. 
Her daughters were eagerly called to partake of her joy. Jane resolutely kept her place at the table; but Elizabeth, to satisfy her mother, went to the window\97she looked,\97she saw Mr. Darcy with him, and sat down again by her sister. 
"There is a gentleman with him, mamma," said Kitty; "who can it be?" 
"Some acquaintance or other, my dear, I suppose; I am sure I do not know." 
"La!" replied Kitty, "it looks just like that man that used to be with him before. Mr. what's-his-name. That tall, proud man." 
"Good gracious! Mr. Darcy!\97and so it does, I vow. Well, any friend of Mr. Bingley's will always be welcome here, to be sure; but else I must say that I hate the very sight of him." 
Jane looked at Elizabeth with surprise and concern. She knew but little of their meeting in Derbyshire, and therefore felt for the awkwardness which must attend her sister, in seeing him almost for the first time after receiving his explanatory letter. Both sisters were uncomfortable enough. Each felt for the other, and of course for themselves; and their mother talked on, of her dislike of Mr. Darcy, and her resolution to be civil to him only as Mr. Bingley's friend, without being heard by either of them. But Elizabeth had sources of uneasiness which could not be suspected by Jane, to whom she had never yet had courage to shew Mrs. Gardiner's letter, or to relate her own change of sentiment towards him. To Jane, he could be only a man whose proposals she had refused, and whose merit she had undervalued; but to her own more extensive information, he was the person to whom the whole family were indebted for the first of benefits, and whom she regarded herself with an interest, if not quite so tender, at least as reasonable and just as what Jane felt for Bingley. Her astonishment at his coming\97at his coming to Netherfield, to Longbourn, and voluntarily seeking her again, was almost equal to what she had known on first witnessing his altered behaviour in Derbyshire. 
The colour which had been driven from her face, returned for half a minute with an additional glow, and a smile of delight added lustre to her eyes, as she thought for that space of time that his affection and wishes must still be unshaken. But she would not be secure. 
"Let me first see how he behaves," said she; "it will then be early enough for expectation." 
She sat intently at work, striving to be composed, and without daring to lift up her eyes, till anxious curiosity carried them to the face of her sister as the servant was approaching the door. Jane looked a little paler than usual, but more sedate than Elizabeth had expected. On the gentlemen's appearing, her colour increased; yet she received them with tolerable ease, and with a propriety of behaviour equally free from any symptom of resentment or any unnecessary complaisance. 
Elizabeth said as little to either as civility would allow, and sat down again to her work, with an eagerness which it did not often command. She had ventured only one glance at Darcy. He looked serious, as usual; and, she thought, more as he had been used to look in Hertfordshire, than as she had seen him at Pemberley. But, perhaps he could not in her mother's presence be what he was before her uncle and aunt. It was a painful, but not an improbable, conjecture. 
Bingley, she had likewise seen for an instant, and in that short period saw him looking both pleased and embarrassed. He was received by Mrs. Bennet with a degree of civility which made her two daughters ashamed, especially when contrasted with the cold and ceremonious politeness of her curtsey and address to his friend. 
Elizabeth, particularly, who knew that her mother owed to the latter the preservation of her favourite daughter from irremediable infamy, was hurt and distressed to a most painful degree by a distinction so ill applied. 
Darcy, after inquiring of her how Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner did, a question which she could not answer without confusion, said scarcely any thing. He was not seated by her; perhaps that was the reason of his silence; but it had not been so in Derbyshire. There he had talked to her friends, when he could not to herself. But now several minutes elapsed without bringing the sound of his voice; and when occasionally, unable to resist the impulse of curiosity, she raised he eyes to his face, she as often found him looking at Jane as at herself, and frequently on no object but the ground. More thoughtfulness and less anxiety to please, than when they last met, were plainly expressed. She was disappointed, and angry with herself for being so. 
"Could I expect it to be otherwise!" said she. "Yet why did he come?" 
She was in no humour for conversation with anyone but himself; and to him she had hardly courage to speak. 
She inquired after his sister, but could do no more. 
"It is a long time, Mr. Bingley, since you went away," said Mrs. Bennet. 
He readily agreed to it. 
"I began to be afraid you would never come back again. People DID say you meant to quit the place entirely at Michaelmas; but, however, I hope it is not true. A great many changes have happened in the neighbourhood, since you went away. Miss Lucas is married and settled. And one of my own daughters. I suppose you have heard of it; indeed, you must have seen it in the papers. It was in The Times and The Courier, I know; though it was not put in as it ought to be. It was only said, 'Lately, George Wickham, Esq. to Miss Lydia Bennet,' without there being a syllable said of her father, or the place where she lived, or any thing. It was my brother Gardiner's drawing up too, and I wonder how he came to make such an awkward business of it. Did you see it?" 
Bingley replied that he did, and made his congratulations. Elizabeth dared not lift up her eyes. How Mr. Darcy looked, therefore, she could not tell. 
"It is a delightful thing, to be sure, to have a daughter well married," continued her mother, "but at the same time, Mr. Bingley, it is very hard to have her taken such a way from me. They are gone down to Newcastle, a place quite northward, it seems, and there they are to stay I do not know how long. His regiment is there; for I suppose you have heard of his leaving the \97\97shire, and of his being gone into the regulars. Thank Heaven! he has SOME friends, though perhaps not so many as he deserves." 
Elizabeth, who knew this to be levelled at Mr. Darcy, was in such misery of shame, that she could hardly keep her seat. It drew from her, however, the exertion of speaking, which nothing else had so effectually done before; and she asked Bingley whether he meant to make any stay in the country at present. A few weeks, he believed. 
"When you have killed all your own birds, Mr. Bingley," said her mother, "I beg you will come here, and shoot as many as you please on Mr. Bennet's manor. I am sure he will be vastly happy to oblige you, and will save all the best of the covies for you." 
Elizabeth's misery increased, at such unnecessary, such officious attention! Were the same fair prospect to arise at present as had flattered them a year ago, every thing, she was persuaded, would be hastening to the same vexatious conclusion. At that instant, she felt that years of happiness could not make Jane or herself amends for moments of such painful confusion. 
"The first wish of my heart," said she to herself, "is never more to be in company with either of them. Their society can afford no pleasure that will atone for such wretchedness as this! Let me never see either one or the other again!" 
Yet the misery, for which years of happiness were to offer no compensation, received soon afterwards material relief, from observing how much the beauty of her sister re-kindled the admiration of her former lover. When first he came in, he had spoken to her but little; but every five minutes seemed to be giving her more of his attention. He found her as handsome as she had been last year; as good natured, and as unaffected, though not quite so chatty. Jane was anxious that no difference should be perceived in her at all, and was really persuaded that she talked as much as ever. But her mind was so busily engaged, that she did not always know when she was silent. 
When the gentlemen rose to go away, Mrs. Bennet was mindful of her intended civility, and they were invited and engaged to dine at Longbourn in a few days time. 
"You are quite a visit in my debt, Mr. Bingley," she added, "for when you went to town last winter, you promised to take a family dinner with us, as soon as you returned. I have not forgot, you see; and I assure you, I was very much disappointed that you did not come back and keep your engagement." 
Bingley looked a little silly at this reflection, and said something of his concern at having been prevented by business. They then went away. 
Mrs. Bennet had been strongly inclined to ask them to stay and dine there that day; but, though she always kept a very good table, she did not think any thing less than two courses could be good enough for a man on whom she had such anxious designs, or satisfy the appetite and pride of one who had ten thousand a year. 
Chapter 54
As soon as they were gone, Elizabeth walked out to recover her spirits; or in other words, to dwell without interruption on those subjects that must deaden them more. Mr. Darcy's behaviour astonished and vexed her. 
"Why, if he came only to be silent, grave, and indifferent," said she, "did he come at all?" 
She could settle it in no way that gave her pleasure. 
"He could be still amiable, still pleasing, to my uncle and aunt, when he was in town; and why not to me? If he fears me, why come hither? If he no longer cares for me, why silent? Teasing, teasing, man! I will think no more about him." 
Her resolution was for a short time involuntarily kept by the approach of her sister, who joined her with a cheerful look, which showed her better satisfied with their visitors, than Elizabeth. 
"Now," said she, "that this first meeting is over, I feel perfectly easy. I know my own strength, and I shall never be embarrassed again by his coming. I am glad he dines here on Tuesday. It will then be publicly seen that, on both sides, we meet only as common and indifferent acquaintance." 
"Yes, very indifferent indeed," said Elizabeth, laughingly. "Oh, Jane, take care." 
"My dear Lizzy, you cannot think me so weak, as to be in danger now?" 
"I think you are in very great danger of making him as much in love with you as ever." 
* * * * * 
They did not see the gentlemen again till Tuesday; and Mrs. Bennet, in the meanwhile, was giving way to all the happy schemes, which the good humour and common politeness of Bingley, in half an hour's visit, had revived. 
On Tuesday there was a large party assembled at Longbourn; and the two who were most anxiously expected, to the credit of their punctuality as sportsmen, were in very good time. When they repaired to the dining-room, Elizabeth eagerly watched to see whether Bingley would take the place, which, in all their former parties, had belonged to him, by her sister. Her prudent mother, occupied by the same ideas, forbore to invite him to sit by herself. On entering the room, he seemed to hesitate; but Jane happened to look round, and happened to smile: it was decided. He placed himself by her. 
Elizabeth, with a triumphant sensation, looked towards his friend. He bore it with noble indifference, and she would have imagined that Bingley had received his sanction to be happy, had she not seen his eyes likewise turned towards Mr. Darcy, with an expression of half-laughing alarm. 
His behaviour to her sister was such, during dinner time, as showed an admiration of her, which, though more guarded than formerly, persuaded Elizabeth, that if left wholly to himself, Jane's happiness, and his own, would be speedily secured. Though she dared not depend upon the consequence, she yet received pleasure from observing his behaviour. It gave her all the animation that her spirits could boast; for she was in no cheerful humour. Mr. Darcy was almost as far from her as the table could divide them. He was on one side of her mother. She knew how little such a situation would give pleasure to either, or make either appear to advantage. She was not near enough to hear any of their discourse, but she could see how seldom they spoke to each other, and how formal and cold was their manner whenever they did. Her mother's ungraciousness, made the sense of what they owed him more painful to Elizabeth's mind; and she would, at times, have given any thing to be privileged to tell him that his kindness was neither unknown nor unfelt by the whole of the family. 
She was in hopes that the evening would afford some opportunity of bringing them together; that the whole of the visit would not pass away without enabling them to enter into something more of conversation than the mere ceremonious salutation attending his entrance. Anxious and uneasy, the period which passed in the drawing-room, before the gentlemen came, was wearisome and dull to a degree that almost made her uncivil. She looked forward to their entrance as the point on which all her chance of pleasure for the evening must depend. 
"If he does not come to me, THEN," said she, "I shall give him up for ever." 
The gentlemen came; and she thought he looked as if he would have answered her hopes; but, alas! the ladies had crowded round the table, where Miss Bennet was making tea, and Elizabeth pouring out the coffee, in so close a confederacy that there was not a single vacancy near her which would admit of a chair. And on the gentlemen's approaching, one of the girls moved closer to her than ever, and said, in a whisper: 
"The men shan't come and part us, I am determined. We want none of them; do we?" 
Darcy had walked away to another part of the room. She followed him with her eyes, envied everyone to whom he spoke, had scarcely patience enough to help anybody to coffee; and then was enraged against herself for being so silly! 
"A man who has once been refused! How could I ever be foolish enough to expect a renewal of his love? Is there one among the sex, who would not protest against such a weakness as a second proposal to the same woman? There is no indignity so abhorrent to their feelings!" 
She was a little revived, however, by his bringing back his coffee cup himself; and she seized the opportunity of saying: 
"Is your sister at Pemberley still?" 
"Yes, she will remain there till Christmas." 
"And quite alone? Have all her friends left her?" 
"Mrs. Annesley is with her. The others have been gone on to Scarborough, these three weeks." 
She could think of nothing more to say; but if he wished to converse with her, he might have better success. He stood by her, however, for some minutes, in silence; and, at last, on the young lady's whispering to Elizabeth again, he walked away. 
When the tea-things were removed, and the card-tables placed, the ladies all rose, and Elizabeth was then hoping to be soon joined by him, when all her views were overthrown by seeing him fall a victim to her mother's rapacity for whist players, and in a few moments after seated with the rest of the party. She now lost every expectation of pleasure. They were confined for the evening at different tables, and she had nothing to hope, but that his eyes were so often turned towards her side of the room, as to make him play as unsuccessfully as herself. 
Mrs. Bennet had designed to keep the two Netherfield gentlemen to supper; but their carriage was unluckily ordered before any of the others, and she had no opportunity of detaining them. 
"Well girls," said she, as soon as they were left to themselves, "What say you to the day? I think every thing has passed off uncommonly well, I assure you. The dinner was as well dressed as any I ever saw. The venison was roasted to a turn\97and everybody said they never saw so fat a haunch. The soup was fifty times better than what we had at the Lucases' last week; and even Mr. Darcy acknowledged, that the partridges were remarkably well done; and I suppose he has two or three French cooks at least. And, my dear Jane, I never saw you look in greater beauty. Mrs. Long said so too, for I asked her whether you did not. And what do you think she said besides? 'Ah! Mrs. Bennet, we shall have her at Netherfield at last.' She did indeed. I do think Mrs. Long is as good a creature as ever lived\97and her nieces are very pretty behaved girls, and not at all handsome: I like them prodigiously." 
Mrs. Bennet, in short, was in very great spirits; she had seen enough of Bingley's behaviour to Jane, to be convinced that she would get him at last; and her expectations of advantage to her family, when in a happy humour, were so far beyond reason, that she was quite disappointed at not seeing him there again the next day, to make his proposals. 
"It has been a very agreeable day," said Miss Bennet to Elizabeth. "The party seemed so well selected, so suitable one with the other. I hope we may often meet again." 
Elizabeth smiled. 
"Lizzy, you must not do so. You must not suspect me. It mortifies me. I assure you that I have now learnt to enjoy his conversation as an agreeable and sensible young man, without having a wish beyond it. I am perfectly satisfied, from what his manners now are, that he never had any design of engaging my affection. It is only that he is blessed with greater sweetness of address, and a stronger desire of generally pleasing, than any other man." 
"You are very cruel," said her sister, "you will not let me smile, and are provoking me to it every moment." 
"How hard it is in some cases to be believed!" 
"And how impossible in others!" 
"But why should you wish to persuade me that I feel more than I acknowledge?" 
"That is a question which I hardly know how to answer. We all love to instruct, though we can teach only what is not worth knowing. Forgive me; and if you persist in indifference, do not make me your confidante." 
Chapter 55
A few days after this visit, Mr. Bingley called again, and alone. His friend had left him that morning for London, but was to return home in ten days time. He sat with them above an hour, and was in remarkably good spirits. Mrs. Bennet invited him to dine with them; but, with many expressions of concern, he confessed himself engaged elsewhere. 
"Next time you call," said she, "I hope we shall be more lucky." 
He should be particularly happy at any time, etc. etc.; and if she would give him leave, would take an early opportunity of waiting on them. 
"Can you come to-morrow?" 
Yes, he had no engagement at all for to-morrow; and her invitation was accepted with alacrity. 
He came, and in such very good time that the ladies were none of them dressed. In ran Mrs. Bennet to her daughter's room, in her dressing gown, and with her hair half finished, crying out: 
"My dear Jane, make haste and hurry down. He is come\97Mr. Bingley is come. He is, indeed. Make haste, make haste. Here, Sarah, come to Miss Bennet this moment, and help her on with her gown. Never mind Miss Lizzy's hair." 
"We will be down as soon as we can," said Jane; "but I dare say Kitty is forwarder than either of us, for she went up stairs half an hour ago." 
"Oh! hang Kitty! what has she to do with it? Come be quick, be quick! Where is your sash, my dear?" 
But when her mother was gone, Jane would not be prevailed on to go down without one of her sisters. 
The same anxiety to get them by themselves was visible again in the evening. After tea, Mr. Bennet retired to the library, as was his custom, and Mary went up stairs to her instrument. Two obstacles of the five being thus removed, Mrs. Bennet sat looking and winking at Elizabeth and Catherine for a considerable time, without making any impression on them. Elizabeth would not observe her; and when at last Kitty did, she very innocently said, "What is the matter mamma? What do you keep winking at me for? What am I to do?" 
"Nothing child, nothing. I did not wink at you." She then sat still five minutes longer; but unable to waste such a precious occasion, she suddenly got up, and saying to Kitty, "Come here, my love, I want to speak to you," took her out of the room. Jane instantly gave a look at Elizabeth which spoke her distress at such premeditation, and her entreaty that SHE would not give in to it. In a few minutes, Mrs. Bennet half-opened the door and called out: 
"Lizzy, my dear, I want to speak with you." 
Elizabeth was forced to go. 
"We may as well leave them by themselves you know;" said her mother, as soon as she was in the hall. "Kitty and I are going upstairs to sit in my dressing-room." 
Elizabeth made no attempt to reason with her mother, but remained quietly in the hall, till she and Kitty were out of sight, then returned into the drawing-room. 
Mrs. Bennet's schemes for this day were ineffectual. Bingley was every thing that was charming, except the professed lover of her daughter. His ease and cheerfulness rendered him a most agreeable addition to their evening party; and he bore with the ill-judged officiousness of the mother, and heard all her silly remarks with a forbearance and command of countenance particularly grateful to the daughter. 
He scarcely needed an invitation to stay supper; and before he went away, an engagement was formed, chiefly through his own and Mrs. Bennet's means, for his coming next morning to shoot with her husband. 
After this day, Jane said no more of her indifference. Not a word passed between the sisters concerning Bingley; but Elizabeth went to bed in the happy belief that all must speedily be concluded, unless Mr. Darcy returned within the stated time. Seriously, however, she felt tolerably persuaded that all this must have taken place with that gentleman's concurrence. 
Bingley was punctual to his appointment; and he and Mr. Bennet spent the morning together, as had been agreed on. The latter was much more agreeable than his companion expected. There was nothing of presumption or folly in Bingley that could provoke his ridicule, or disgust him into silence; and he was more communicative, and less eccentric, than the other had ever seen him. Bingley of course returned with him to dinner; and in the evening Mrs. Bennet's invention was again at work to get every body away from him and her daughter. Elizabeth, who had a letter to write, went into the breakfast room for that purpose soon after tea; for as the others were all going to sit down to cards, she could not be wanted to counteract her mother's schemes. 
But on returning to the drawing-room, when her letter was finished, she saw, to her infinite surprise, there was reason to fear that her mother had been too ingenious for her. On opening the door, she perceived her sister and Bingley standing together over the hearth, as if engaged in earnest conversation; and had this led to no suspicion, the faces of both, as they hastily turned round and moved away from each other, would have told it all. Their situation was awkward enough; but HER'S she thought was still worse. Not a syllable was uttered by either; and Elizabeth was on the point of going away again, when Bingley, who as well as the other had sat down, suddenly rose, and whispering a few words to her sister, ran out of the room. 
Jane could have no reserves from Elizabeth, where confidence would give pleasure; and instantly embracing her, acknowledged, with the liveliest emotion, that she was the happiest creature in the world. 
"'Tis too much!" she added, "by far too much. I do not deserve it. Oh! why is not everybody as happy?" 
Elizabeth's congratulations were given with a sincerity, a warmth, a delight, which words could but poorly express. Every sentence of kindness was a fresh source of happiness to Jane. But she would not allow herself to stay with her sister, or say half that remained to be said for the present. 
"I must go instantly to my mother;" she cried. "I would not on any account trifle with her affectionate solicitude; or allow her to hear it from anyone but myself. He is gone to my father already. Oh! Lizzy, to know that what I have to relate will give such pleasure to all my dear family! how shall I bear so much happiness!" 
She then hastened away to her mother, who had purposely broken up the card party, and was sitting up stairs with Kitty. 
Elizabeth, who was left by herself, now smiled at the rapidity and ease with which an affair was finally settled, that had given them so many previous months of suspense and vexation. 
"And this," said she, "is the end of all his friend's anxious circumspection! of all his sister's falsehood and contrivance! the happiest, wisest, most reasonable end!" 
In a few minutes she was joined by Bingley, whose conference with her father had been short and to the purpose. 
"Where is your sister?" said he hastily, as he opened the door. 
"With my mother up stairs. She will be down in a moment, I dare say." 
He then shut the door, and, coming up to her, claimed the good wishes and affection of a sister. Elizabeth honestly and heartily expressed her delight in the prospect of their relationship. They shook hands with great cordiality; and then, till her sister came down, she had to listen to all he had to say of his own happiness, and of Jane's perfections; and in spite of his being a lover, Elizabeth really believed all his expectations of felicity to be rationally founded, because they had for basis the excellent understanding, and super-excellent disposition of Jane, and a general similarity of feeling and taste between her and himself. 
It was an evening of no common delight to them all; the satisfaction of Miss Bennet's mind gave a glow of such sweet animation to her face, as made her look handsomer than ever. Kitty simpered and smiled, and hoped her turn was coming soon. Mrs. Bennet could not give her consent or speak her approbation in terms warm enough to satisfy her feelings, though she talked to Bingley of nothing else for half an hour; and when Mr. Bennet joined them at supper, his voice and manner plainly showed how really happy he was. 
Not a word, however, passed his lips in allusion to it, till their visitor took his leave for the night; but as soon as he was gone, he turned to his daughter, and said: 
"Jane, I congratulate you. You will be a very happy woman." 
Jane went to him instantly, kissed him, and thanked him for his goodness. 
"You are a good girl;" he replied, "and I have great pleasure in thinking you will be so happily settled. I have not a doubt of your doing very well together. Your tempers are by no means unlike. You are each of you so complying, that nothing will ever be resolved on; so easy, that every servant will cheat you; and so generous, that you will always exceed your income." 
"I hope not so. Imprudence or thoughtlessness in money matters would be unpardonable in me." 
"Exceed their income! My dear Mr. Bennet," cried his wife, "what are you talking of? Why, he has four or five thousand a year, and very likely more." Then addressing her daughter, "Oh! my dear, dear Jane, I am so happy! I am sure I shan't get a wink of sleep all night. I knew how it would be. I always said it must be so, at last. I was sure you could not be so beautiful for nothing! I remember, as soon as ever I saw him, when he first came into Hertfordshire last year, I thought how likely it was that you should come together. Oh! he is the handsomest young man that ever was seen!" 
Wickham, Lydia, were all forgotten. Jane was beyond competition her favourite child. At that moment, she cared for no other. Her younger sisters soon began to make interest with her for objects of happiness which she might in future be able to dispense. 
Mary petitioned for the use of the library at Netherfield; and Kitty begged very hard for a few balls there every winter. 
Bingley, from this time, was of course a daily visitor at Longbourn; coming frequently before breakfast, and always remaining till after supper; unless when some barbarous neighbour, who could not be enough detested, had given him an invitation to dinner which he thought himself obliged to accept. 
Elizabeth had now but little time for conversation with her sister; for while he was present, Jane had no attention to bestow on anyone else; but she found herself considerably useful to both of them in those hours of separation that must sometimes occur. In the absence of Jane, he always attached himself to Elizabeth, for the pleasure of talking of her; and when Bingley was gone, Jane constantly sought the same means of relief. 
"He has made me so happy," said she, one evening, "by telling me that he was totally ignorant of my being in town last spring! I had not believed it possible." 
"I suspected as much," replied Elizabeth. "But how did he account for it?" 
"It must have been his sister's doing. They were certainly no friends to his acquaintance with me, which I cannot wonder at, since he might have chosen so much more advantageously in many respects. But when they see, as I trust they will, that their brother is happy with me, they will learn to be contented, and we shall be on good terms again; though we can never be what we once were to each other." 
"That is the most unforgiving speech," said Elizabeth, "that I ever heard you utter. Good girl! It would vex me, indeed, to see you again the dupe of Miss Bingley's pretended regard." 
"Would you believe it, Lizzy, that when he went to town last November, he really loved me, and nothing but a persuasion of MY being indifferent would have prevented his coming down again!" 
"He made a little mistake to be sure; but it is to the credit of his modesty." 
This naturally introduced a panegyric from Jane on his diffidence, and the little value he put on his own good qualities. Elizabeth was pleased to find that he had not betrayed the interference of his friend; for, though Jane had the most generous and forgiving heart in the world, she knew it was a circumstance which must prejudice her against him. 
"I am certainly the most fortunate creature that ever existed!" cried Jane. "Oh! Lizzy, why am I thus singled from my family, and blessed above them all! If I could but see YOU as happy! If there WERE but such another man for you!" 
"If you were to give me forty such men, I never could be so happy as you. Till I have your disposition, your goodness, I never can have your happiness. No, no, let me shift for myself; and, perhaps, if I have very good luck, I may meet with another Mr. Collins in time." 
The situation of affairs in the Longbourn family could not be long a secret. Mrs. Bennet was privileged to whisper it to Mrs. Phillips, and she ventured, without any permission, to do the same by all her neighbours in Meryton. 
The Bennets were speedily pronounced to be the luckiest family in the world, though only a few weeks before, when Lydia had first run away, they had been generally proved to be marked out for misfortune. 
Chapter 56
One morning, about a week after Bingley's engagement with Jane had been formed, as he and the females of the family were sitting together in the dining-room, their attention was suddenly drawn to the window, by the sound of a carriage; and they perceived a chaise and four driving up the lawn. It was too early in the morning for visitors, and besides, the equipage did not answer to that of any of their neighbours. The horses were post; and neither the carriage, nor the livery of the servant who preceded it, were familiar to them. As it was certain, however, that somebody was coming, Bingley instantly prevailed on Miss Bennet to avoid the confinement of such an intrusion, and walk away with him into the shrubbery. They both set off, and the conjectures of the remaining three continued, though with little satisfaction, till the door was thrown open and their visitor entered. It was Lady Catherine de Bourgh. 
They were of course all intending to be surprised; but their astonishment was beyond their expectation; and on the part of Mrs. Bennet and Kitty, though she was perfectly unknown to them, even inferior to what Elizabeth felt. 
She entered the room with an air more than usually ungracious, made no other reply to Elizabeth's salutation than a slight inclination of the head, and sat down without saying a word. Elizabeth had mentioned her name to her mother on her ladyship's entrance, though no request of introduction had been made. 
Mrs. Bennet, all amazement, though flattered by having a guest of such high importance, received her with the utmost politeness. After sitting for a moment in silence, she said very stiffly to Elizabeth, 
"I hope you are well, Miss Bennet. That lady, I suppose, is your mother." 
Elizabeth replied very concisely that she was. 
"And THAT I suppose is one of your sisters." 
"Yes, madam," said Mrs. Bennet, delighted to speak to a Lady Catherine. "She is my youngest girl but one. My youngest of all is lately married, and my eldest is somewhere about the grounds, walking with a young man who, I believe, will soon become a part of the family." 
"You have a very small park here," returned Lady Catherine after a short silence. 
"It is nothing in comparison of Rosings, my lady, I dare say; but I assure you it is much larger than Sir William Lucas's." 
"This must be a most inconvenient sitting room for the evening, in summer; the windows are full west." 
Mrs. Bennet assured her that they never sat there after dinner, and then added: 
"May I take the liberty of asking your ladyship whether you left Mr. and Mrs. Collins well." 
"Yes, very well. I saw them the night before last." 
Elizabeth now expected that she would produce a letter for her from Charlotte, as it seemed the only probable motive for her calling. But no letter appeared, and she was completely puzzled. 
Mrs. Bennet, with great civility, begged her ladyship to take some refreshment; but Lady Catherine very resolutely, and not very politely, declined eating any thing; and then, rising up, said to Elizabeth, 
"Miss Bennet, there seemed to be a prettyish kind of a little wilderness on one side of your lawn. I should be glad to take a turn in it, if you will favour me with your company." 
"Go, my dear," cried her mother, "and show her ladyship about the different walks. I think she will be pleased with the hermitage." 
Elizabeth obeyed, and running into her own room for her parasol, attended her noble guest down stairs. As they passed through the hall, Lady Catherine opened the doors into the dining-parlour and drawing-room, and pronouncing them, after a short survey, to be decent looking rooms, walked on. 
Her carriage remained at the door, and Elizabeth saw that her waiting-woman was in it. They proceeded in silence along the gravel walk that led to the copse; Elizabeth was determined to make no effort for conversation with a woman who was now more than usually insolent and disagreeable. 
"How could I ever think her like her nephew?" said she, as she looked in her face. 
As soon as they entered the copse, Lady Catherine began in the following manner:\97 
"You can be at no loss, Miss Bennet, to understand the reason of my journey hither. Your own heart, your own conscience, must tell you why I come." 
Elizabeth looked with unaffected astonishment. 
"Indeed, you are mistaken, Madam. I have not been at all able to account for the honour of seeing you here." 
"Miss Bennet," replied her ladyship, in an angry tone, "you ought to know, that I am not to be trifled with. But however insincere YOU may choose to be, you shall not find ME so. My character has ever been celebrated for its sincerity and frankness, and in a cause of such moment as this, I shall certainly not depart from it. A report of a most alarming nature reached me two days ago. I was told that not only your sister was on the point of being most advantageously married, but that you, that Miss Elizabeth Bennet, would, in all likelihood, be soon afterwards united to my nephew, my own nephew, Mr. Darcy. Though I KNOW it must be a scandalous falsehood, though I would not injure him so much as to suppose the truth of it possible, I instantly resolved on setting off for this place, that I might make my sentiments known to you." 
"If you believed it impossible to be true," said Elizabeth, colouring with astonishment and disdain, "I wonder you took the trouble of coming so far. What could your ladyship propose by it?" 
"At once to insist upon having such a report universally contradicted." 
"Your coming to Longbourn, to see me and my family," said Elizabeth coolly, "will be rather a confirmation of it; if, indeed, such a report is in existence." 
"If! Do you then pretend to be ignorant of it? Has it not been industriously circulated by yourselves? Do you not know that such a report is spread abroad?" 
"I never heard that it was." 
"And can you likewise declare, that there is no foundation for it?" 
"I do not pretend to possess equal frankness with your ladyship. You may ask questions which I shall not choose to answer." 
"This is not to be borne. Miss Bennet, I insist on being satisfied. Has he, has my nephew, made you an offer of marriage?" 
"Your ladyship has declared it to be impossible." 
"It ought to be so; it must be so, while he retains the use of his reason. But your arts and allurements may, in a moment of infatuation, have made him forget what he owes to himself and to all his family. You may have drawn him in." 
"If I have, I shall be the last person to confess it." 
"Miss Bennet, do you know who I am? I have not been accustomed to such language as this. I am almost the nearest relation he has in the world, and am entitled to know all his dearest concerns." 
"But you are not entitled to know mine; nor will such behaviour as this, ever induce me to be explicit." 
"Let me be rightly understood. This match, to which you have the presumption to aspire, can never take place. No, never. Mr. Darcy is engaged to my daughter. Now what have you to say?" 
"Only this; that if he is so, you can have no reason to suppose he will make an offer to me." 
Lady Catherine hesitated for a moment, and then replied: 
"The engagement between them is of a peculiar kind. From their infancy, they have been intended for each other. It was the favourite wish of HIS mother, as well as of her's. While in their cradles, we planned the union: and now, at the moment when the wishes of both sisters would be accomplished in their marriage, to be prevented by a young woman of inferior birth, of no importance in the world, and wholly unallied to the family! Do you pay no regard to the wishes of his friends? To his tacit engagement with Miss de Bourgh? Are you lost to every feeling of propriety and delicacy? Have you not heard me say that from his earliest hours he was destined for his cousin?" 
"Yes, and I had heard it before. But what is that to me? If there is no other objection to my marrying your nephew, I shall certainly not be kept from it by knowing that his mother and aunt wished him to marry Miss de Bourgh. You both did as much as you could in planning the marriage. Its completion depended on others. If Mr. Darcy is neither by honour nor inclination confined to his cousin, why is not he to make another choice? And if I am that choice, why may not I accept him?" 
"Because honour, decorum, prudence, nay, interest, forbid it. Yes, Miss Bennet, interest; for do not expect to be noticed by his family or friends, if you wilfully act against the inclinations of all. You will be censured, slighted, and despised, by everyone connected with him. Your alliance will be a disgrace; your name will never even be mentioned by any of us." 
"These are heavy misfortunes," replied Elizabeth. "But the wife of Mr. Darcy must have such extraordinary sources of happiness necessarily attached to her situation, that she could, upon the whole, have no cause to repine." 
"Obstinate, headstrong girl! I am ashamed of you! Is this your gratitude for my attentions to you last spring? Is nothing due to me on that score? Let us sit down. You are to understand, Miss Bennet, that I came here with the determined resolution of carrying my purpose; nor will I be dissuaded from it. I have not been used to submit to any person's whims. I have not been in the habit of brooking disappointment." 
"THAT will make your ladyship's situation at present more pitiable; but it will have no effect on me." 
"I will not be interrupted. Hear me in silence. My daughter and my nephew are formed for each other. They are descended, on the maternal side, from the same noble line; and, on the father's, from respectable, honourable, and ancient\97though untitled\97families. Their fortune on both sides is splendid. They are destined for each other by the voice of every member of their respective houses; and what is to divide them? The upstart pretensions of a young woman without family, connections, or fortune. Is this to be endured! But it must not, shall not be. If you were sensible of your own good, you would not wish to quit the sphere in which you have been brought up." 
"In marrying your nephew, I should not consider myself as quitting that sphere. He is a gentleman; I am a gentleman's daughter; so far we are equal." 
"True. You ARE a gentleman's daughter. But who was your mother? Who are your uncles and aunts? Do not imagine me ignorant of their condition." 
"Whatever my connections may be," said Elizabeth, "if your nephew does not object to them, they can be nothing to YOU." 
"Tell me once for all, are you engaged to him?" 
Though Elizabeth would not, for the mere purpose of obliging Lady Catherine, have answered this question, she could not but say, after a moment's deliberation: 
"I am not." 
Lady Catherine seemed pleased. 
"And will you promise me, never to enter into such an engagement?" 
"I will make no promise of the kind." 
"Miss Bennet I am shocked and astonished. I expected to find a more reasonable young woman. But do not deceive yourself into a belief that I will ever recede. I shall not go away till you have given me the assurance I require." 
"And I certainly NEVER shall give it. I am not to be intimidated into anything so wholly unreasonable. Your ladyship wants Mr. Darcy to marry your daughter; but would my giving you the wished-for promise make their marriage at all more probable? Supposing him to be attached to me, would my refusing to accept his hand make him wish to bestow it on his cousin? Allow me to say, Lady Catherine, that the arguments with which you have supported this extraordinary application have been as frivolous as the application was ill-judged. You have widely mistaken my character, if you think I can be worked on by such persuasions as these. How far your nephew might approve of your interference in his affairs, I cannot tell; but you have certainly no right to concern yourself in mine. I must beg, therefore, to be importuned no farther on the subject." 
"Not so hasty, if you please. I have by no means done. To all the objections I have already urged, I have still another to add. I am no stranger to the particulars of your youngest sister's infamous elopement. I know it all; that the young man's marrying her was a patched-up business, at the expence of your father and uncles. And is such a girl to be my nephew's sister? Is her husband, is the son of his late father's steward, to be his brother? Heaven and earth!\97of what are you thinking? Are the shades of Pemberley to be thus polluted?" 
"You can now have nothing farther to say," she resentfully answered. "You have insulted me in every possible method. I must beg to return to the house." 
And she rose as she spoke. Lady Catherine rose also, and they turned back. Her ladyship was highly incensed. 
"You have no regard, then, for the honour and credit of my nephew! Unfeeling, selfish girl! Do you not consider that a connection with you must disgrace him in the eyes of everybody?" 
"Lady Catherine, I have nothing farther to say. You know my sentiments." 
"You are then resolved to have him?" 
"I have said no such thing. I am only resolved to act in that manner, which will, in my own opinion, constitute my happiness, without reference to YOU, or to any person so wholly unconnected with me." 
"It is well. You refuse, then, to oblige me. You refuse to obey the claims of duty, honour, and gratitude. You are determined to ruin him in the opinion of all his friends, and make him the contempt of the world." 
"Neither duty, nor honour, nor gratitude," replied Elizabeth, "have any possible claim on me, in the present instance. No principle of either would be violated by my marriage with Mr. Darcy. And with regard to the resentment of his family, or the indignation of the world, if the former WERE excited by his marrying me, it would not give me one moment's concern\97and the world in general would have too much sense to join in the scorn." 
"And this is your real opinion! This is your final resolve! Very well. I shall now know how to act. Do not imagine, Miss Bennet, that your ambition will ever be gratified. I came to try you. I hoped to find you reasonable; but, depend upon it, I will carry my point." 
In this manner Lady Catherine talked on, till they were at the door of the carriage, when, turning hastily round, she added, "I take no leave of you, Miss Bennet. I send no compliments to your mother. You deserve no such attention. I am most seriously displeased." 
Elizabeth made no answer; and without attempting to persuade her ladyship to return into the house, walked quietly into it herself. She heard the carriage drive away as she proceeded up stairs. Her mother impatiently met her at the door of the dressing-room, to ask why Lady Catherine would not come in again and rest herself. 
"She did not choose it," said her daughter, "she would go." 
"She is a very fine-looking woman! and her calling here was prodigiously civil! for she only came, I suppose, to tell us the Collinses were well. She is on her road somewhere, I dare say, and so, passing through Meryton, thought she might as well call on you. I suppose she had nothing particular to say to you, Lizzy?" 
Elizabeth was forced to give into a little falsehood here; for to acknowledge the substance of their conversation was impossible. 
Chapter 57
The discomposure of spirits which this extraordinary visit threw Elizabeth into, could not be easily overcome; nor could she, for many hours, learn to think of it less than incessantly. Lady Catherine, it appeared, had actually taken the trouble of this journey from Rosings, for the sole purpose of breaking off her supposed engagement with Mr. Darcy. It was a rational scheme, to be sure! but from what the report of their engagement could originate, Elizabeth was at a loss to imagine; till she recollected that HIS being the intimate friend of Bingley, and HER being the sister of Jane, was enough, at a time when the expectation of one wedding made everybody eager for another, to supply the idea. She had not herself forgotten to feel that the marriage of her sister must bring them more frequently together. And her neighbours at Lucas lodge, therefore (for through their communication with the Collinses, the report, she concluded, had reached lady Catherine), had only set that down as almost certain and immediate, which she had looked forward to as possible at some future time. 
In revolving Lady Catherine's expressions, however, she could not help feeling some uneasiness as to the possible consequence of her persisting in this interference. From what she had said of her resolution to prevent their marriage, it occurred to Elizabeth that she must meditate an application to her nephew; and how HE might take a similar representation of the evils attached to a connection with her, she dared not pronounce. She knew not the exact degree of his affection for his aunt, or his dependence on her judgment, but it was natural to suppose that he thought much higher of her ladyship than SHE could do; and it was certain that, in enumerating the miseries of a marriage with ONE, whose immediate connections were so unequal to his own, his aunt would address him on his weakest side. With his notions of dignity, he would probably feel that the arguments, which to Elizabeth had appeared weak and ridiculous, contained much good sense and solid reasoning. 
If he had been wavering before as to what he should do, which had often seemed likely, the advice and entreaty of so near a relation might settle every doubt, and determine him at once to be as happy as dignity unblemished could make him. In that case he would return no more. Lady Catherine might see him in her way through town; and his engagement to Bingley of coming again to Netherfield must give way. 
"If, therefore, an excuse for not keeping his promise should come to his friend within a few days," she added, "I shall know how to understand it. I shall then give over every expectation, every wish of his constancy. If he is satisfied with only regretting me, when he might have obtained my affections and hand, I shall soon cease to regret him at all." 
* * * * * 
The surprise of the rest of the family, on hearing who their visitor had been, was very great; but they obligingly satisfied it, with the same kind of supposition which had appeased Mrs. Bennet's curiosity; and Elizabeth was spared from much teasing on the subject. 
The next morning, as she was going down stairs, she was met by her father, who came out of his library with a letter in his hand. 
"Lizzy," said he, "I was going to look for you; come into my room." 
She followed him thither; and her curiosity to know what he had to tell her was heightened by the supposition of its being in some manner connected with the letter he held. It suddenly struck her that it might be from Lady Catherine; and she anticipated with dismay all the consequent explanations. 
She followed her father to the fire place, and they both sat down. He then said, 
"I have received a letter this morning that has astonished me exceedingly. As it principally concerns yourself, you ought to know its contents. I did not know before, that I had two daughters on the brink of matrimony. Let me congratulate you on a very important conquest." 
The colour now rushed into Elizabeth's cheeks in the instantaneous conviction of its being a letter from the nephew, instead of the aunt; and she was undetermined whether most to be pleased that he explained himself at all, or offended that his letter was not rather addressed to herself; when her father continued: 
"You look conscious. Young ladies have great penetration in such matters as these; but I think I may defy even YOUR sagacity, to discover the name of your admirer. This letter is from Mr. Collins." 
"From Mr. Collins! and what can HE have to say?" 
"Something very much to the purpose of course. He begins with congratulations on the approaching nuptials of my eldest daughter, of which, it seems, he has been told by some of the good-natured, gossiping Lucases. I shall not sport with your impatience, by reading what he says on that point. What relates to yourself, is as follows." "Having thus offered you the sincere congratulations of Mrs. Collins and myself on this happy event, let me now add a short hint on the subject of another; of which we have been advertised by the same authority. Your daughter Elizabeth, it is presumed, will not long bear the name of Bennet, after her elder sister has resigned it, and the chosen partner of her fate may be reasonably looked up to as one of the most illustrious personages in this land." 
"Can you possibly guess, Lizzy, who is meant by this?" "This young gentleman is blessed, in a peculiar way, with every thing the heart of mortal can most desire,\97splendid property, noble kindred, and extensive patronage. Yet in spite of all these temptations, let me warn my cousin Elizabeth, and yourself, of what evils you may incur by a precipitate closure with this gentleman's proposals, which, of course, you will be inclined to take immediate advantage of." 
"Have you any idea, Lizzy, who this gentleman is? But now it comes out." 
"My motive for cautioning you is as follows. We have reason to imagine that his aunt, Lady Catherine de Bourgh, does not look on the match with a friendly eye." 
"MR. DARCY, you see, is the man! Now, Lizzy, I think I HAVE surprised you. Could he, or the Lucases, have pitched on any man within the circle of our acquaintance, whose name would have given the lie more effectually to what they related? Mr. Darcy, who never looks at any woman but to see a blemish, and who probably never looked at you in his life! It is admirable!" 
Elizabeth tried to join in her father's pleasantry, but could only force one most reluctant smile. Never had his wit been directed in a manner so little agreeable to her. 
"Are you not diverted?" 
"Oh! yes. Pray read on." 
"After mentioning the likelihood of this marriage to her ladyship last night, she immediately, with her usual condescension, expressed what she felt on the occasion; when it become apparent, that on the score of some family objections on the part of my cousin, she would never give her consent to what she termed so disgraceful a match. I thought it my duty to give the speediest intelligence of this to my cousin, that she and her noble admirer may be aware of what they are about, and not run hastily into a marriage which has not been properly sanctioned." "Mr. Collins moreover adds," "I am truly rejoiced that my cousin Lydia's sad business has been so well hushed up, and am only concerned that their living together before the marriage took place should be so generally known. I must not, however, neglect the duties of my station, or refrain from declaring my amazement at hearing that you received the young couple into your house as soon as they were married. It was an encouragement of vice; and had I been the rector of Longbourn, I should very strenuously have opposed it. You ought certainly to forgive them as a christian, but never to admit them in your sight, or allow their names to be mentioned in your hearing." "That is his notion of christian forgiveness! The rest of his letter is only about his dear Charlotte's situation, and his expectation of a young olive-branch. But, Lizzy, you look as if you did not enjoy it. You are not going to be Missish, I hope, and pretend to be affronted at an idle report. For what do we live, but to make sport for our neighbours, and laugh at them in our turn?" 
"Oh!" cried Elizabeth, "I am excessively diverted. But it is so strange!" 
"Yes\97THAT is what makes it amusing. Had they fixed on any other man it would have been nothing; but HIS perfect indifference, and YOUR pointed dislike, make it so delightfully absurd! Much as I abominate writing, I would not give up Mr. Collins's correspondence for any consideration. Nay, when I read a letter of his, I cannot help giving him the preference even over Wickham, much as I value the impudence and hypocrisy of my son-in-law. And pray, Lizzy, what said Lady Catherine about this report? Did she call to refuse her consent?" 
To this question his daughter replied only with a laugh; and as it had been asked without the least suspicion, she was not distressed by his repeating it. Elizabeth had never been more at a loss to make her feelings appear what they were not. It was necessary to laugh, when she would rather have cried. Her father had most cruelly mortified her, by what he said of Mr. Darcy's indifference, and she could do nothing but wonder at such a want of penetration, or fear that perhaps, instead of his seeing too little, she might have fancied too much. 
Chapter 58
Instead of receiving any such letter of excuse from his friend, as Elizabeth half expected Mr. Bingley to do, he was able to bring Darcy with him to Longbourn before many days had passed after Lady Catherine's visit. The gentlemen arrived early; and, before Mrs. Bennet had time to tell him of their having seen his aunt, of which her daughter sat in momentary dread, Bingley, who wanted to be alone with Jane, proposed their all walking out. It was agreed to. Mrs. Bennet was not in the habit of walking; Mary could never spare time; but the remaining five set off together. Bingley and Jane, however, soon allowed the others to outstrip them. They lagged behind, while Elizabeth, Kitty, and Darcy were to entertain each other. Very little was said by either; Kitty was too much afraid of him to talk; Elizabeth was secretly forming a desperate resolution; and perhaps he might be doing the same. 
They walked towards the Lucases, because Kitty wished to call upon Maria; and as Elizabeth saw no occasion for making it a general concern, when Kitty left them she went boldly on with him alone. Now was the moment for her resolution to be executed, and, while her courage was high, she immediately said: 
"Mr. Darcy, I am a very selfish creature; and, for the sake of giving relief to my own feelings, care not how much I may be wounding your's. I can no longer help thanking you for your unexampled kindness to my poor sister. Ever since I have known it, I have been most anxious to acknowledge to you how gratefully I feel it. Were it known to the rest of my family, I should not have merely my own gratitude to express." 
"I am sorry, exceedingly sorry," replied Darcy, in a tone of surprise and emotion, "that you have ever been informed of what may, in a mistaken light, have given you uneasiness. I did not think Mrs. Gardiner was so little to be trusted." 
"You must not blame my aunt. Lydia's thoughtlessness first betrayed to me that you had been concerned in the matter; and, of course, I could not rest till I knew the particulars. Let me thank you again and again, in the name of all my family, for that generous compassion which induced you to take so much trouble, and bear so many mortifications, for the sake of discovering them." 
"If you WILL thank me," he replied, "let it be for yourself alone. That the wish of giving happiness to you might add force to the other inducements which led me on, I shall not attempt to deny. But your FAMILY owe me nothing. Much as I respect them, I believe I thought only of YOU." 
Elizabeth was too much embarrassed to say a word. After a short pause, her companion added, "You are too generous to trifle with me. If your feelings are still what they were last April, tell me so at once. MY affections and wishes are unchanged, but one word from you will silence me on this subject for ever." 
Elizabeth, feeling all the more than common awkwardness and anxiety of his situation, now forced herself to speak; and immediately, though not very fluently, gave him to understand that her sentiments had undergone so material a change, since the period to which he alluded, as to make her receive with gratitude and pleasure his present assurances. The happiness which this reply produced, was such as he had probably never felt before; and he expressed himself on the occasion as sensibly and as warmly as a man violently in love can be supposed to do. Had Elizabeth been able to encounter his eye, she might have seen how well the expression of heartfelt delight, diffused over his face, became him; but, though she could not look, she could listen, and he told her of feelings, which, in proving of what importance she was to him, made his affection every moment more valuable. 
They walked on, without knowing in what direction. There was too much to be thought, and felt, and said, for attention to any other objects. She soon learnt that they were indebted for their present good understanding to the efforts of his aunt, who did call on him in her return through London, and there relate her journey to Longbourn, its motive, and the substance of her conversation with Elizabeth; dwelling emphatically on every expression of the latter which, in her ladyship's apprehension, peculiarly denoted her perverseness and assurance; in the belief that such a relation must assist her endeavours to obtain that promise from her nephew which she had refused to give. But, unluckily for her ladyship, its effect had been exactly contrariwise. 
"It taught me to hope," said he, "as I had scarcely ever allowed myself to hope before. I knew enough of your disposition to be certain that, had you been absolutely, irrevocably decided against me, you would have acknowledged it to Lady Catherine, frankly and openly." 
Elizabeth coloured and laughed as she replied, "Yes, you know enough of my frankness to believe me capable of THAT. After abusing you so abominably to your face, I could have no scruple in abusing you to all your relations." 
"What did you say of me, that I did not deserve? For, though your accusations were ill-founded, formed on mistaken premises, my behaviour to you at the time had merited the severest reproof. It was unpardonable. I cannot think of it without abhorrence." 
"We will not quarrel for the greater share of blame annexed to that evening," said Elizabeth. "The conduct of neither, if strictly examined, will be irreproachable; but since then, we have both, I hope, improved in civility." 
"I cannot be so easily reconciled to myself. The recollection of what I then said, of my conduct, my manners, my expressions during the whole of it, is now, and has been many months, inexpressibly painful to me. Your reproof, so well applied, I shall never forget: 'had you behaved in a more gentlemanlike manner.' Those were your words. You know not, you can scarcely conceive, how they have tortured me;\97though it was some time, I confess, before I was reasonable enough to allow their justice." 
"I was certainly very far from expecting them to make so strong an impression. I had not the smallest idea of their being ever felt in such a way." 
"I can easily believe it. You thought me then devoid of every proper feeling, I am sure you did. The turn of your countenance I shall never forget, as you said that I could not have addressed you in any possible way that would induce you to accept me." 
"Oh! do not repeat what I then said. These recollections will not do at all. I assure you that I have long been most heartily ashamed of it." 
Darcy mentioned his letter. "Did it," said he, "did it soon make you think better of me? Did you, on reading it, give any credit to its contents?" 
She explained what its effect on her had been, and how gradually all her former prejudices had been removed. 
"I knew," said he, "that what I wrote must give you pain, but it was necessary. I hope you have destroyed the letter. There was one part especially, the opening of it, which I should dread your having the power of reading again. I can remember some expressions which might justly make you hate me." 
"The letter shall certainly be burnt, if you believe it essential to the preservation of my regard; but, though we have both reason to think my opinions not entirely unalterable, they are not, I hope, quite so easily changed as that implies." 
"When I wrote that letter," replied Darcy, "I believed myself perfectly calm and cool, but I am since convinced that it was written in a dreadful bitterness of spirit." 
"The letter, perhaps, began in bitterness, but it did not end so. The adieu is charity itself. But think no more of the letter. The feelings of the person who wrote, and the person who received it, are now so widely different from what they were then, that every unpleasant circumstance attending it ought to be forgotten. You must learn some of my philosophy. Think only of the past as its remembrance gives you pleasure." 
"I cannot give you credit for any philosophy of the kind. Your retrospections must be so totally void of reproach, that the contentment arising from them is not of philosophy, but, what is much better, of innocence. But with me, it is not so. Painful recollections will intrude which cannot, which ought not, to be repelled. I have been a selfish being all my life, in practice, though not in principle. As a child I was taught what was right, but I was not taught to correct my temper. I was given good principles, but left to follow them in pride and conceit. Unfortunately an only son (for many years an only child), I was spoilt by my parents, who, though good themselves (my father, particularly, all that was benevolent and amiable), allowed, encouraged, almost taught me to be selfish and overbearing; to care for none beyond my own family circle; to think meanly of all the rest of the world; to wish at least to think meanly of their sense and worth compared with my own. Such I was, from eight to eight and twenty; and such I might still have been but for you, dearest, loveliest Elizabeth! What do I not owe you! You taught me a lesson, hard indeed at first, but most advantageous. By you, I was properly humbled. I came to you without a doubt of my reception. You showed me how insufficient were all my pretensions to please a woman worthy of being pleased." 
"Had you then persuaded yourself that I should?" 
"Indeed I had. What will you think of my vanity? I believed you to be wishing, expecting my addresses." 
"My manners must have been in fault, but not intentionally, I assure you. I never meant to deceive you, but my spirits might often lead me wrong. How you must have hated me after THAT evening?" 
"Hate you! I was angry perhaps at first, but my anger soon began to take a proper direction." 
"I am almost afraid of asking what you thought of me, when we met at Pemberley. You blamed me for coming?" 
"No indeed; I felt nothing but surprise." 
"Your surprise could not be greater than MINE in being noticed by you. My conscience told me that I deserved no extraordinary politeness, and I confess that I did not expect to receive MORE than my due." 
"My object then," replied Darcy, "was to show you, by every civility in my power, that I was not so mean as to resent the past; and I hoped to obtain your forgiveness, to lessen your ill opinion, by letting you see that your reproofs had been attended to. How soon any other wishes introduced themselves I can hardly tell, but I believe in about half an hour after I had seen you." 
He then told her of Georgiana's delight in her acquaintance, and of her disappointment at its sudden interruption; which naturally leading to the cause of that interruption, she soon learnt that his resolution of following her from Derbyshire in quest of her sister had been formed before he quitted the inn, and that his gravity and thoughtfulness there had arisen from no other struggles than what such a purpose must comprehend. 
She expressed her gratitude again, but it was too painful a subject to each, to be dwelt on farther. 
After walking several miles in a leisurely manner, and too busy to know any thing about it, they found at last, on examining their watches, that it was time to be at home. 
"What could become of Mr. Bingley and Jane!" was a wonder which introduced the discussion of their affairs. Darcy was delighted with their engagement; his friend had given him the earliest information of it. 
"I must ask whether you were surprised?" said Elizabeth. 
"Not at all. When I went away, I felt that it would soon happen." 
"That is to say, you had given your permission. I guessed as much." And though he exclaimed at the term, she found that it had been pretty much the case. 
"On the evening before my going to London," said he, "I made a confession to him, which I believe I ought to have made long ago. I told him of all that had occurred to make my former interference in his affairs absurd and impertinent. His surprise was great. He had never had the slightest suspicion. I told him, moreover, that I believed myself mistaken in supposing, as I had done, that your sister was indifferent to him; and as I could easily perceive that his attachment to her was unabated, I felt no doubt of their happiness together." 
Elizabeth could not help smiling at his easy manner of directing his friend. 
"Did you speak from your own observation," said she, "when you told him that my sister loved him, or merely from my information last spring?" 
"From the former. I had narrowly observed her during the two visits which I had lately made here; and I was convinced of her affection." 
"And your assurance of it, I suppose, carried immediate conviction to him." 
"It did. Bingley is most unaffectedly modest. His diffidence had prevented his depending on his own judgment in so anxious a case, but his reliance on mine made every thing easy. I was obliged to confess one thing, which for a time, and not unjustly, offended him. I could not allow myself to conceal that your sister had been in town three months last winter, that I had known it, and purposely kept it from him. He was angry. But his anger, I am persuaded, lasted no longer than he remained in any doubt of your sister's sentiments. He has heartily forgiven me now." 
Elizabeth longed to observe that Mr. Bingley had been a most delightful friend; so easily guided that his worth was invaluable; but she checked herself. She remembered that he had yet to learn to be laughed at, and it was rather too early to begin. In anticipating the happiness of Bingley, which of course was to be inferior only to his own, he continued the conversation till they reached the house. In the hall they parted. 
CHAPTER 59 
"My dear Lizzy, where can you have been walking to?" was a question which Elizabeth received from Jane as soon as she entered their room, and from all the others when they sat down to table. She had only to say in reply, that they had wandered about, till she was beyond her own knowledge. She coloured as she spoke; but neither that, nor any thing else, awakened a suspicion of the truth. 
The evening passed quietly, unmarked by any thing extraordinary. The acknowledged lovers talked and laughed, the unacknowledged were silent. Darcy was not of a disposition in which happiness overflows in mirth; and Elizabeth, agitated and confused, rather KNEW that she was happy than FELT herself to be so; for, besides the immediate embarrassment, there were other evils before her. She anticipated what would be felt in the family when her situation became known; she was aware that no one liked him but Jane; and even feared that with the others it was a dislike which not all his fortune and consequence might do away. 
At night she opened her heart to Jane. Though suspicion was very far from Miss Bennet's general habits, she was absolutely incredulous here. 
"You are joking, Lizzy. This cannot be!\97engaged to Mr. Darcy! No, no, you shall not deceive me. I know it to be impossible." 
"This is a wretched beginning indeed! My sole dependence was on you; and I am sure nobody else will believe me, if you do not. Yet, indeed, I am in earnest. I speak nothing but the truth. He still loves me, and we are engaged." 
Jane looked at her doubtingly. "Oh, Lizzy! it cannot be. I know how much you dislike him." 
"You know nothing of the matter. THAT is all to be forgot. Perhaps I did not always love him so well as I do now. But in such cases as these, a good memory is unpardonable. This is the last time I shall ever remember it myself." 
Miss Bennet still looked all amazement. Elizabeth again, and more seriously assured her of its truth. 
"Good Heaven! can it be really so! Yet now I must believe you," cried Jane. "My dear, dear Lizzy, I would\97I do congratulate you\97but are you certain? forgive the question \97are you quite certain that you can be happy with him?" 
"There can be no doubt of that. It is settled between us already, that we are to be the happiest couple in the world. But are you pleased, Jane? Shall you like to have such a brother?" 
"Very, very much. Nothing could give either Bingley or myself more delight. But we considered it, we talked of it as impossible. And do you really love him quite well enough? Oh, Lizzy! do any thing rather than marry without affection. Are you quite sure that you feel what you ought to do?" 
"Oh, yes! You will only think I feel MORE than I ought to do, when I tell you all." 
"What do you mean?" 
"Why, I must confess that I love him better than I do Bingley. I am afraid you will be angry." 
"My dearest sister, now BE serious. I want to talk very seriously. Let me know every thing that I am to know, without delay. Will you tell me how long you have loved him?" 
"It has been coming on so gradually, that I hardly know when it began. But I believe I must date it from my first seeing his beautiful grounds at Pemberley." 
Another entreaty that she would be serious, however, produced the desired effect; and she soon satisfied Jane by her solemn assurances of attachment. When convinced on that article, Miss Bennet had nothing farther to wish. 
"Now I am quite happy," said she, "for you will be as happy as myself. I always had a value for him. Were it for nothing but his love of you, I must always have esteemed him; but now, as Bingley's friend and your husband, there can be only Bingley and yourself more dear to me. But Lizzy, you have been very sly, very reserved with me. How little did you tell me of what passed at Pemberley and Lambton! I owe all that I know of it to another, not to you." 
Elizabeth told her the motives of her secrecy. She had been unwilling to mention Bingley; and the unsettled state of her own feelings had made her equally avoid the name of his friend. But now she would no longer conceal from her his share in Lydia's marriage. All was acknowledged, and half the night spent in conversation. 
* * * * * 
"Good gracious!" cried Mrs. Bennet, as she stood at a window the next morning, "if that disagreeable Mr. Darcy is not coming here again with our dear Bingley! What can he mean by being so tiresome as to be always coming here? I had no notion but he would go a-shooting, or something or other, and not disturb us with his company. What shall we do with him? Lizzy, you must walk out with him again, that he may not be in Bingley's way." 
Elizabeth could hardly help laughing at so convenient a proposal; yet was really vexed that her mother should be always giving him such an epithet. 
As soon as they entered, Bingley looked at her so expressively, and shook hands with such warmth, as left no doubt of his good information; and he soon afterwards said aloud, "Mrs. Bennet, have you no more lanes hereabouts in which Lizzy may lose her way again to-day?" 
"I advise Mr. Darcy, and Lizzy, and Kitty," said Mrs. Bennet, "to walk to Oakham Mount this morning. It is a nice long walk, and Mr. Darcy has never seen the view." 
"It may do very well for the others," replied Mr. Bingley; "but I am sure it will be too much for Kitty. Won't it, Kitty?" Kitty owned that she had rather stay at home. Darcy professed a great curiosity to see the view from the Mount, and Elizabeth silently consented. As she went up stairs to get ready, Mrs. Bennet followed her, saying: 
"I am quite sorry, Lizzy, that you should be forced to have that disagreeable man all to yourself. But I hope you will not mind it: it is all for Jane's sake, you know; and there is no occasion for talking to him, except just now and then. So, do not put yourself to inconvenience." 
During their walk, it was resolved that Mr. Bennet's consent should be asked in the course of the evening. Elizabeth reserved to herself the application for her mother's. She could not determine how her mother would take it; sometimes doubting whether all his wealth and grandeur would be enough to overcome her abhorrence of the man. But whether she were violently set against the match, or violently delighted with it, it was certain that her manner would be equally ill adapted to do credit to her sense; and she could no more bear that Mr. Darcy should hear the first raptures of her joy, than the first vehemence of her disapprobation. 
* * * * * 
In the evening, soon after Mr. Bennet withdrew to the library, she saw Mr. Darcy rise also and follow him, and her agitation on seeing it was extreme. She did not fear her father's opposition, but he was going to be made unhappy; and that it should be through her means\97that SHE, his favourite child, should be distressing him by her choice, should be filling him with fears and regrets in disposing of her\97was a wretched reflection, and she sat in misery till Mr. Darcy appeared again, when, looking at him, she was a little relieved by his smile. In a few minutes he approached the table where she was sitting with Kitty; and, while pretending to admire her work said in a whisper, "Go to your father, he wants you in the library." She was gone directly. 
Her father was walking about the room, looking grave and anxious. "Lizzy," said he, "what are you doing? Are you out of your senses, to be accepting this man? Have not you always hated him?" 
How earnestly did she then wish that her former opinions had been more reasonable, her expressions more moderate! It would have spared her from explanations and professions which it was exceedingly awkward to give; but they were now necessary, and she assured him, with some confusion, of her attachment to Mr. Darcy. 
"Or, in other words, you are determined to have him. He is rich, to be sure, and you may have more fine clothes and fine carriages than Jane. But will they make you happy?" 
"Have you any other objection," said Elizabeth, "than your belief of my indifference?" 
"None at all. We all know him to be a proud, unpleasant sort of man; but this would be nothing if you really liked him." 
"I do, I do like him," she replied, with tears in her eyes, "I love him. Indeed he has no improper pride. He is perfectly amiable. You do not know what he really is; then pray do not pain me by speaking of him in such terms." 
"Lizzy," said her father, "I have given him my consent. He is the kind of man, indeed, to whom I should never dare refuse any thing, which he condescended to ask. I now give it to YOU, if you are resolved on having him. But let me advise you to think better of it. I know your disposition, Lizzy. I know that you could be neither happy nor respectable, unless you truly esteemed your husband; unless you looked up to him as a superior. Your lively talents would place you in the greatest danger in an unequal marriage. You could scarcely escape discredit and misery. My child, let me not have the grief of seeing YOU unable to respect your partner in life. You know not what you are about." 
Elizabeth, still more affected, was earnest and solemn in her reply; and at length, by repeated assurances that Mr. Darcy was really the object of her choice, by explaining the gradual change which her estimation of him had undergone, relating her absolute certainty that his affection was not the work of a day, but had stood the test of many months suspense, and enumerating with energy all his good qualities, she did conquer her father's incredulity, and reconcile him to the match. 
"Well, my dear," said he, when she ceased speaking, "I have no more to say. If this be the case, he deserves you. I could not have parted with you, my Lizzy, to anyone less worthy." 
To complete the favourable impression, she then told him what Mr. Darcy had voluntarily done for Lydia. He heard her with astonishment. 
"This is an evening of wonders, indeed! And so, Darcy did every thing; made up the match, gave the money, paid the fellow's debts, and got him his commission! So much the better. It will save me a world of trouble and economy. Had it been your uncle's doing, I must and WOULD have paid him; but these violent young lovers carry every thing their own way. I shall offer to pay him to-morrow; he will rant and storm about his love for you, and there will be an end of the matter." 
He then recollected her embarrassment a few days before, on his reading Mr. Collins's letter; and after laughing at her some time, allowed her at last to go\97saying, as she quitted the room, "If any young men come for Mary or Kitty, send them in, for I am quite at leisure." 
Elizabeth's mind was now relieved from a very heavy weight; and, after half an hour's quiet reflection in her own room, she was able to join the others with tolerable composure. Every thing was too recent for gaiety, but the evening passed tranquilly away; there was no longer any thing material to be dreaded, and the comfort of ease and familiarity would come in time. 
When her mother went up to her dressing-room at night, she followed her, and made the important communication. Its effect was most extraordinary; for on first hearing it, Mrs. Bennet sat quite still, and unable to utter a syllable. Nor was it under many, many minutes that she could comprehend what she heard; though not in general backward to credit what was for the advantage of her family, or that came in the shape of a lover to any of them. She began at length to recover, to fidget about in her chair, get up, sit down again, wonder, and bless herself. 
"Good gracious! Lord bless me! only think! dear me! Mr. Darcy! Who would have thought it! And is it really true? Oh! my sweetest Lizzy! how rich and how great you will be! What pin-money, what jewels, what carriages you will have! Jane's is nothing to it\97nothing at all. I am so pleased\97so happy. Such a charming man!\97so handsome! so tall!\97Oh, my dear Lizzy! pray apologise for my having disliked him so much before. I hope he will overlook it. Dear, dear Lizzy. A house in town! Every thing that is charming! Three daughters married! Ten thousand a year! Oh, Lord! What will become of me. I shall go distracted." 
This was enough to prove that her approbation need not be doubted: and Elizabeth, rejoicing that such an effusion was heard only by herself, soon went away. But before she had been three minutes in her own room, her mother followed her. 
"My dearest child," she cried, "I can think of nothing else! Ten thousand a year, and very likely more! 'Tis as good as a Lord! And a special licence. You must and shall be married by a special licence. But my dearest love, tell me what dish Mr. Darcy is particularly fond of, that I may have it to-morrow." 
This was a sad omen of what her mother's behaviour to the gentleman himself might be; and Elizabeth found that, though in the certain possession of his warmest affection, and secure of her relations' consent, there was still something to be wished for. But the morrow passed off much better than she expected; for Mrs. Bennet luckily stood in such awe of her intended son-in-law that she ventured not to speak to him, unless it was in her power to offer him any attention, or mark her deference for his opinion. 
Elizabeth had the satisfaction of seeing her father taking pains to get acquainted with him; and Mr. Bennet soon assured her that he was rising every hour in his esteem. 
"I admire all my three sons-in-law highly," said he. "Wickham, perhaps, is my favourite; but I think I shall like YOUR husband quite as well as Jane's." 
Chapter 60
Elizabeth's spirits soon rising to playfulness again, she wanted Mr. Darcy to account for his having ever fallen in love with her. "How could you begin?" said she. "I can comprehend your going on charmingly, when you had once made a beginning; but what could set you off in the first place?" 
"I cannot fix on the hour, or the spot, or the look, or the words, which laid the foundation. It is too long ago. I was in the middle before I knew that I HAD begun." 
"My beauty you had early withstood, and as for my manners\97my behaviour to YOU was at least always bordering on the uncivil, and I never spoke to you without rather wishing to give you pain than not. Now be sincere; did you admire me for my impertinence?" 
"For the liveliness of your mind, I did." 
"You may as well call it impertinence at once. It was very little less. The fact is, that you were sick of civility, of deference, of officious attention. You were disgusted with the women who were always speaking, and looking, and thinking for YOUR approbation alone. I roused, and interested you, because I was so unlike THEM. Had you not been really amiable, you would have hated me for it; but in spite of the pains you took to disguise yourself, your feelings were always noble and just; and in your heart, you thoroughly despised the persons who so assiduously courted you. There\97I have saved you the trouble of accounting for it; and really, all things considered, I begin to think it perfectly reasonable. To be sure, you knew no actual good of me\97but nobody thinks of THAT when they fall in love." 
"Was there no good in your affectionate behaviour to Jane while she was ill at Netherfield?" 
"Dearest Jane! who could have done less for her? But make a virtue of it by all means. My good qualities are under your protection, and you are to exaggerate them as much as possible; and, in return, it belongs to me to find occasions for teasing and quarrelling with you as often as may be; and I shall begin directly by asking you what made you so unwilling to come to the point at last. What made you so shy of me, when you first called, and afterwards dined here? Why, especially, when you called, did you look as if you did not care about me?" 
"Because you were grave and silent, and gave me no encouragement." 
"But I was embarrassed." 
"And so was I." 
"You might have talked to me more when you came to dinner." 
"A man who had felt less, might." 
"How unlucky that you should have a reasonable answer to give, and that I should be so reasonable as to admit it! But I wonder how long you WOULD have gone on, if you had been left to yourself. I wonder when you WOULD have spoken, if I had not asked you! My resolution of thanking you for your kindness to Lydia had certainly great effect. TOO MUCH, I am afraid; for what becomes of the moral, if our comfort springs from a breach of promise? for I ought not to have mentioned the subject. This will never do." 
"You need not distress yourself. The moral will be perfectly fair. Lady Catherine's unjustifiable endeavours to separate us were the means of removing all my doubts. I am not indebted for my present happiness to your eager desire of expressing your gratitude. I was not in a humour to wait for any opening of your's. My aunt's intelligence had given me hope, and I was determined at once to know every thing." 
"Lady Catherine has been of infinite use, which ought to make her happy, for she loves to be of use. But tell me, what did you come down to Netherfield for? Was it merely to ride to Longbourn and be embarrassed? or had you intended any more serious consequence?" 
"My real purpose was to see YOU, and to judge, if I could, whether I might ever hope to make you love me. My avowed one, or what I avowed to myself, was to see whether your sister were still partial to Bingley, and if she were, to make the confession to him which I have since made." 
"Shall you ever have courage to announce to Lady Catherine what is to befall her?" 
"I am more likely to want more time than courage, Elizabeth. But it ought to done, and if you will give me a sheet of paper, it shall be done directly." 
"And if I had not a letter to write myself, I might sit by you and admire the evenness of your writing, as another young lady once did. But I have an aunt, too, who must not be longer neglected." 
From an unwillingness to confess how much her intimacy with Mr. Darcy had been over-rated, Elizabeth had never yet answered Mrs. Gardiner's long letter; but now, having THAT to communicate which she knew would be most welcome, she was almost ashamed to find that her uncle and aunt had already lost three days of happiness, and immediately wrote as follows: 
"I would have thanked you before, my dear aunt, as I ought to have done, for your long, kind, satisfactory, detail of particulars; but to say the truth, I was too cross to write. You supposed more than really existed. But NOW suppose as much as you choose; give a loose to your fancy, indulge your imagination in every possible flight which the subject will afford, and unless you believe me actually married, you cannot greatly err. You must write again very soon, and praise him a great deal more than you did in your last. I thank you, again and again, for not going to the Lakes. How could I be so silly as to wish it! Your idea of the ponies is delightful. We will go round the Park every day. I am the happiest creature in the world. Perhaps other people have said so before, but not one with such justice. I am happier even than Jane; she only smiles, I laugh. Mr. Darcy sends you all the love in the world that he can spare from me. You are all to come to Pemberley at Christmas. Yours, etc." 
Mr. Darcy's letter to Lady Catherine was in a different style; and still different from either was what Mr. Bennet sent to Mr. Collins, in reply to his last. 
"DEAR SIR, 
"I must trouble you once more for congratulations. Elizabeth will soon be the wife of Mr. Darcy. Console Lady Catherine as well as you can. But, if I were you, I would stand by the nephew. He has more to give. 
"Yours sincerely, etc." 
Miss Bingley's congratulations to her brother, on his approaching marriage, were all that was affectionate and insincere. She wrote even to Jane on the occasion, to express her delight, and repeat all her former professions of regard. Jane was not deceived, but she was affected; and though feeling no reliance on her, could not help writing her a much kinder answer than she knew was deserved. 
The joy which Miss Darcy expressed on receiving similar information, was as sincere as her brother's in sending it. Four sides of paper were insufficient to contain all her delight, and all her earnest desire of being loved by her sister. 
Before any answer could arrive from Mr. Collins, or any congratulations to Elizabeth from his wife, the Longbourn family heard that the Collinses were come themselves to Lucas lodge. The reason of this sudden removal was soon evident. Lady Catherine had been rendered so exceedingly angry by the contents of her nephew's letter, that Charlotte, really rejoicing in the match, was anxious to get away till the storm was blown over. At such a moment, the arrival of her friend was a sincere pleasure to Elizabeth, though in the course of their meetings she must sometimes think the pleasure dearly bought, when she saw Mr. Darcy exposed to all the parading and obsequious civility of her husband. He bore it, however, with admirable calmness. He could even listen to Sir William Lucas, when he complimented him on carrying away the brightest jewel of the country, and expressed his hopes of their all meeting frequently at St. James's, with very decent composure. If he did shrug his shoulders, it was not till Sir William was out of sight. 
Mrs. Phillips's vulgarity was another, and perhaps a greater, tax on his forbearance; and though Mrs. Phillips, as well as her sister, stood in too much awe of him to speak with the familiarity which Bingley's good humour encouraged, yet, whenever she DID speak, she must be vulgar. Nor was her respect for him, though it made her more quiet, at all likely to make her more elegant. Elizabeth did all she could to shield him from the frequent notice of either, and was ever anxious to keep him to herself, and to those of her family with whom he might converse without mortification; and though the uncomfortable feelings arising from all this took from the season of courtship much of its pleasure, it added to the hope of the future; and she looked forward with delight to the time when they should be removed from society so little pleasing to either, to all the comfort and elegance of their family party at Pemberley. 
Chapter 61
Happy for all her maternal feelings was the day on which Mrs. Bennet got rid of her two most deserving daughters. With what delighted pride she afterwards visited Mrs. Bingley, and talked of Mrs. Darcy, may be guessed. I wish I could say, for the sake of her family, that the accomplishment of her earnest desire in the establishment of so many of her children produced so happy an effect as to make her a sensible, amiable, well-informed woman for the rest of her life; though perhaps it was lucky for her husband, who might not have relished domestic felicity in so unusual a form, that she still was occasionally nervous and invariably silly. 
Mr. Bennet missed his second daughter exceedingly; his affection for her drew him oftener from home than any thing else could do. He delighted in going to Pemberley, especially when he was least expected. 
Mr. Bingley and Jane remained at Netherfield only a twelvemonth. So near a vicinity to her mother and Meryton relations was not desirable even to HIS easy temper, or HER affectionate heart. The darling wish of his sisters was then gratified; he bought an estate in a neighbouring county to Derbyshire, and Jane and Elizabeth, in addition to every other source of happiness, were within thirty miles of each other. 
Kitty, to her very material advantage, spent the chief of her time with her two elder sisters. In society so superior to what she had generally known, her improvement was great. She was not of so ungovernable a temper as Lydia; and, removed from the influence of Lydia's example, she became, by proper attention and management, less irritable, less ignorant, and less insipid. From the farther disadvantage of Lydia's society she was of course carefully kept, and though Mrs. Wickham frequently invited her to come and stay with her, with the promise of balls and young men, her father would never consent to her going. 
Mary was the only daughter who remained at home; and she was necessarily drawn from the pursuit of accomplishments by Mrs. Bennet's being quite unable to sit alone. Mary was obliged to mix more with the world, but she could still moralize over every morning visit; and as she was no longer mortified by comparisons between her sisters' beauty and her own, it was suspected by her father that she submitted to the change without much reluctance. 
As for Wickham and Lydia, their characters suffered no revolution from the marriage of her sisters. He bore with philosophy the conviction that Elizabeth must now become acquainted with whatever of his ingratitude and falsehood had before been unknown to her; and in spite of every thing, was not wholly without hope that Darcy might yet be prevailed on to make his fortune. The congratulatory letter which Elizabeth received from Lydia on her marriage, explained to her that, by his wife at least, if not by himself, such a hope was cherished. The letter was to this effect: 
"MY DEAR LIZZY, 
"I wish you joy. If you love Mr. Darcy half as well as I do my dear Wickham, you must be very happy. It is a great comfort to have you so rich, and when you have nothing else to do, I hope you will think of us. I am sure Wickham would like a place at court very much, and I do not think we shall have quite money enough to live upon without some help. Any place would do, of about three or four hundred a year; but however, do not speak to Mr. Darcy about it, if you had rather not. 
"Yours, etc." 
As it happened that Elizabeth had MUCH rather not, she endeavoured in her answer to put an end to every entreaty and expectation of the kind. Such relief, however, as it was in her power to afford, by the practice of what might be called economy in her own private expences, she frequently sent them. It had always been evident to her that such an income as theirs, under the direction of two persons so extravagant in their wants, and heedless of the future, must be very insufficient to their support; and whenever they changed their quarters, either Jane or herself were sure of being applied to for some little assistance towards discharging their bills. Their manner of living, even when the restoration of peace dismissed them to a home, was unsettled in the extreme. They were always moving from place to place in quest of a cheap situation, and always spending more than they ought. His affection for her soon sunk into indifference; her's lasted a little longer; and in spite of her youth and her manners, she retained all the claims to reputation which her marriage had given her. 
Though Darcy could never receive HIM at Pemberley, yet, for Elizabeth's sake, he assisted him farther in his profession. Lydia was occasionally a visitor there, when her husband was gone to enjoy himself in London or Bath; and with the Bingleys they both of them frequently staid so long, that even Bingley's good humour was overcome, and he proceeded so far as to talk of giving them a hint to be gone. 
Miss Bingley was very deeply mortified by Darcy's marriage; but as she thought it advisable to retain the right of visiting at Pemberley, she dropt all her resentment; was fonder than ever of Georgiana, almost as attentive to Darcy as heretofore, and paid off every arrear of civility to Elizabeth. 
Pemberley was now Georgiana's home; and the attachment of the sisters was exactly what Darcy had hoped to see. They were able to love each other even as well as they intended. Georgiana had the highest opinion in the world of Elizabeth; though at first she often listened with an astonishment bordering on alarm at her lively, sportive, manner of talking to her brother. He, who had always inspired in herself a respect which almost overcame her affection, she now saw the object of open pleasantry. Her mind received knowledge which had never before fallen in her way. By Elizabeth's instructions, she began to comprehend that a woman may take liberties with her husband which a brother will not always allow in a sister more than ten years younger than himself. 
Lady Catherine was extremely indignant on the marriage of her nephew; and as she gave way to all the genuine frankness of her character in her reply to the letter which announced its arrangement, she sent him language so very abusive, especially of Elizabeth, that for some time all intercourse was at an end. But at length, by Elizabeth's persuasion, he was prevailed on to overlook the offence, and seek a reconciliation; and, after a little farther resistance on the part of his aunt, her resentment gave way, either to her affection for him, or her curiosity to see how his wife conducted herself; and she condescended to wait on them at Pemberley, in spite of that pollution which its woods had received, not merely from the presence of such a mistress, but the visits of her uncle and aunt from the city. 
With the Gardiners, they were always on the most intimate terms. Darcy, as well as Elizabeth, really loved them; and they were both ever sensible of the warmest gratitude towards the persons who, by bringing her into Derbyshire, had been the means of uniting them. 

Ñêà÷àíî ñ ñàéòà www.HomeEnglish.ru

                   THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER
                                BY
                            MARK TWAIN
                     (Samuel Langhorne Clemens)


                           P R E F A C E

MOST of the adventures recorded in this book really occurred; one or
two were experiences of my own, the rest those of boys who were
schoolmates of mine. Huck Finn is drawn from life; Tom Sawyer also, but
not from an individual--he is a combination of the characteristics of
three boys whom I knew, and therefore belongs to the composite order of
architecture.

The odd superstitions touched upon were all prevalent among children
and slaves in the West at the period of this story--that is to say,
thirty or forty years ago.

Although my book is intended mainly for the entertainment of boys and
girls, I hope it will not be shunned by men and women on that account,
for part of my plan has been to try to pleasantly remind adults of what
they once were themselves, and of how they felt and thought and talked,
and what queer enterprises they sometimes engaged in.

                                                            THE AUTHOR.

HARTFORD, 1876.



                          T O M   S A W Y E R



CHAPTER I

"TOM!"

No answer.

"TOM!"

No answer.

"What's gone with that boy,  I wonder? You TOM!"

No answer.

The old lady pulled her spectacles down and looked over them about the
room; then she put them up and looked out under them. She seldom or
never looked THROUGH them for so small a thing as a boy; they were her
state pair, the pride of her heart, and were built for "style," not
service--she could have seen through a pair of stove-lids just as well.
She looked perplexed for a moment, and then said, not fiercely, but
still loud enough for the furniture to hear:

"Well, I lay if I get hold of you I'll--"

She did not finish, for by this time she was bending down and punching
under the bed with the broom, and so she needed breath to punctuate the
punches with. She resurrected nothing but the cat.

"I never did see the beat of that boy!"

She went to the open door and stood in it and looked out among the
tomato vines and "jimpson" weeds that constituted the garden. No Tom.
So she lifted up her voice at an angle calculated for distance and
shouted:

"Y-o-u-u TOM!"

There was a slight noise behind her and she turned just in time to
seize a small boy by the slack of his roundabout and arrest his flight.

"There! I might 'a' thought of that closet. What you been doing in
there?"

"Nothing."

"Nothing! Look at your hands. And look at your mouth. What IS that
truck?"

"I don't know, aunt."

"Well, I know. It's jam--that's what it is. Forty times I've said if
you didn't let that jam alone I'd skin you. Hand me that switch."

The switch hovered in the air--the peril was desperate--

"My! Look behind you, aunt!"

The old lady whirled round, and snatched her skirts out of danger. The
lad fled on the instant, scrambled up the high board-fence, and
disappeared over it.

His aunt Polly stood surprised a moment, and then broke into a gentle
laugh.

"Hang the boy, can't I never learn anything? Ain't he played me tricks
enough like that for me to be looking out for him by this time? But old
fools is the biggest fools there is. Can't learn an old dog new tricks,
as the saying is. But my goodness, he never plays them alike, two days,
and how is a body to know what's coming? He 'pears to know just how
long he can torment me before I get my dander up, and he knows if he
can make out to put me off for a minute or make me laugh, it's all down
again and I can't hit him a lick. I ain't doing my duty by that boy,
and that's the Lord's truth, goodness knows. Spare the rod and spile
the child, as the Good Book says. I'm a laying up sin and suffering for
us both, I know. He's full of the Old Scratch, but laws-a-me! he's my
own dead sister's boy, poor thing, and I ain't got the heart to lash
him, somehow. Every time I let him off, my conscience does hurt me so,
and every time I hit him my old heart most breaks. Well-a-well, man
that is born of woman is of few days and full of trouble, as the
Scripture says, and I reckon it's so. He'll play hookey this evening, *
and [* Southwestern for "afternoon"] I'll just be obleeged to make him
work, to-morrow, to punish him. It's mighty hard to make him work
Saturdays, when all the boys is having holiday, but he hates work more
than he hates anything else, and I've GOT to do some of my duty by him,
or I'll be the ruination of the child."

Tom did play hookey, and he had a very good time. He got back home
barely in season to help Jim, the small colored boy, saw next-day's
wood and split the kindlings before supper--at least he was there in
time to tell his adventures to Jim while Jim did three-fourths of the
work. Tom's younger brother (or rather half-brother) Sid was already
through with his part of the work (picking up chips), for he was a
quiet boy, and had no adventurous, troublesome ways.

While Tom was eating his supper, and stealing sugar as opportunity
offered, Aunt Polly asked him questions that were full of guile, and
very deep--for she wanted to trap him into damaging revealments. Like
many other simple-hearted souls, it was her pet vanity to believe she
was endowed with a talent for dark and mysterious diplomacy, and she
loved to contemplate her most transparent devices as marvels of low
cunning. Said she:

"Tom, it was middling warm in school, warn't it?"

"Yes'm."

"Powerful warm, warn't it?"

"Yes'm."

"Didn't you want to go in a-swimming, Tom?"

A bit of a scare shot through Tom--a touch of uncomfortable suspicion.
He searched Aunt Polly's face, but it told him nothing. So he said:

"No'm--well, not very much."

The old lady reached out her hand and felt Tom's shirt, and said:

"But you ain't too warm now, though." And it flattered her to reflect
that she had discovered that the shirt was dry without anybody knowing
that that was what she had in her mind. But in spite of her, Tom knew
where the wind lay, now. So he forestalled what might be the next move:

"Some of us pumped on our heads--mine's damp yet. See?"

Aunt Polly was vexed to think she had overlooked that bit of
circumstantial evidence, and missed a trick. Then she had a new
inspiration:

"Tom, you didn't have to undo your shirt collar where I sewed it, to
pump on your head, did you? Unbutton your jacket!"

The trouble vanished out of Tom's face. He opened his jacket. His
shirt collar was securely sewed.

"Bother! Well, go 'long with you. I'd made sure you'd played hookey
and been a-swimming. But I forgive ye, Tom. I reckon you're a kind of a
singed cat, as the saying is--better'n you look. THIS time."

She was half sorry her sagacity had miscarried, and half glad that Tom
had stumbled into obedient conduct for once.

But Sidney said:

"Well, now, if I didn't think you sewed his collar with white thread,
but it's black."

"Why, I did sew it with white! Tom!"

But Tom did not wait for the rest. As he went out at the door he said:

"Siddy, I'll lick you for that."

In a safe place Tom examined two large needles which were thrust into
the lapels of his jacket, and had thread bound about them--one needle
carried white thread and the other black. He said:

"She'd never noticed if it hadn't been for Sid. Confound it! sometimes
she sews it with white, and sometimes she sews it with black. I wish to
geeminy she'd stick to one or t'other--I can't keep the run of 'em. But
I bet you I'll lam Sid for that. I'll learn him!"

He was not the Model Boy of the village. He knew the model boy very
well though--and loathed him.

Within two minutes, or even less, he had forgotten all his troubles.
Not because his troubles were one whit less heavy and bitter to him
than a man's are to a man, but because a new and powerful interest bore
them down and drove them out of his mind for the time--just as men's
misfortunes are forgotten in the excitement of new enterprises. This
new interest was a valued novelty in whistling, which he had just
acquired from a negro, and he was suffering to practise it undisturbed.
It consisted in a peculiar bird-like turn, a sort of liquid warble,
produced by touching the tongue to the roof of the mouth at short
intervals in the midst of the music--the reader probably remembers how
to do it, if he has ever been a boy. Diligence and attention soon gave
him the knack of it, and he strode down the street with his mouth full
of harmony and his soul full of gratitude. He felt much as an
astronomer feels who has discovered a new planet--no doubt, as far as
strong, deep, unalloyed pleasure is concerned, the advantage was with
the boy, not the astronomer.

The summer evenings were long. It was not dark, yet. Presently Tom
checked his whistle. A stranger was before him--a boy a shade larger
than himself. A new-comer of any age or either sex was an impressive
curiosity in the poor little shabby village of St. Petersburg. This boy
was well dressed, too--well dressed on a week-day. This was simply
astounding. His cap was a dainty thing, his close-buttoned blue cloth
roundabout was new and natty, and so were his pantaloons. He had shoes
on--and it was only Friday. He even wore a necktie, a bright bit of
ribbon. He had a citified air about him that ate into Tom's vitals. The
more Tom stared at the splendid marvel, the higher he turned up his
nose at his finery and the shabbier and shabbier his own outfit seemed
to him to grow. Neither boy spoke. If one moved, the other moved--but
only sidewise, in a circle; they kept face to face and eye to eye all
the time. Finally Tom said:

"I can lick you!"

"I'd like to see you try it."

"Well, I can do it."

"No you can't, either."

"Yes I can."

"No you can't."

"I can."

"You can't."

"Can!"

"Can't!"

An uncomfortable pause. Then Tom said:

"What's your name?"

"'Tisn't any of your business, maybe."

"Well I 'low I'll MAKE it my business."

"Well why don't you?"

"If you say much, I will."

"Much--much--MUCH. There now."

"Oh, you think you're mighty smart, DON'T you? I could lick you with
one hand tied behind me, if I wanted to."

"Well why don't you DO it? You SAY you can do it."

"Well I WILL, if you fool with me."

"Oh yes--I've seen whole families in the same fix."

"Smarty! You think you're SOME, now, DON'T you? Oh, what a hat!"

"You can lump that hat if you don't like it. I dare you to knock it
off--and anybody that'll take a dare will suck eggs."

"You're a liar!"

"You're another."

"You're a fighting liar and dasn't take it up."

"Aw--take a walk!"

"Say--if you give me much more of your sass I'll take and bounce a
rock off'n your head."

"Oh, of COURSE you will."

"Well I WILL."

"Well why don't you DO it then? What do you keep SAYING you will for?
Why don't you DO it? It's because you're afraid."

"I AIN'T afraid."

"You are."

"I ain't."

"You are."

Another pause, and more eying and sidling around each other. Presently
they were shoulder to shoulder. Tom said:

"Get away from here!"

"Go away yourself!"

"I won't."

"I won't either."

So they stood, each with a foot placed at an angle as a brace, and
both shoving with might and main, and glowering at each other with
hate. But neither could get an advantage. After struggling till both
were hot and flushed, each relaxed his strain with watchful caution,
and Tom said:

"You're a coward and a pup. I'll tell my big brother on you, and he
can thrash you with his little finger, and I'll make him do it, too."

"What do I care for your big brother? I've got a brother that's bigger
than he is--and what's more, he can throw him over that fence, too."
[Both brothers were imaginary.]

"That's a lie."

"YOUR saying so don't make it so."

Tom drew a line in the dust with his big toe, and said:

"I dare you to step over that, and I'll lick you till you can't stand
up. Anybody that'll take a dare will steal sheep."

The new boy stepped over promptly, and said:

"Now you said you'd do it, now let's see you do it."

"Don't you crowd me now; you better look out."

"Well, you SAID you'd do it--why don't you do it?"

"By jingo! for two cents I WILL do it."

The new boy took two broad coppers out of his pocket and held them out
with derision. Tom struck them to the ground. In an instant both boys
were rolling and tumbling in the dirt, gripped together like cats; and
for the space of a minute they tugged and tore at each other's hair and
clothes, punched and scratched each other's nose, and covered
themselves with dust and glory. Presently the confusion took form, and
through the fog of battle Tom appeared, seated astride the new boy, and
pounding him with his fists. "Holler 'nuff!" said he.

The boy only struggled to free himself. He was crying--mainly from rage.

"Holler 'nuff!"--and the pounding went on.

At last the stranger got out a smothered "'Nuff!" and Tom let him up
and said:

"Now that'll learn you. Better look out who you're fooling with next
time."

The new boy went off brushing the dust from his clothes, sobbing,
snuffling, and occasionally looking back and shaking his head and
threatening what he would do to Tom the "next time he caught him out."
To which Tom responded with jeers, and started off in high feather, and
as soon as his back was turned the new boy snatched up a stone, threw
it and hit him between the shoulders and then turned tail and ran like
an antelope. Tom chased the traitor home, and thus found out where he
lived. He then held a position at the gate for some time, daring the
enemy to come outside, but the enemy only made faces at him through the
window and declined. At last the enemy's mother appeared, and called
Tom a bad, vicious, vulgar child, and ordered him away. So he went
away; but he said he "'lowed" to "lay" for that boy.

He got home pretty late that night, and when he climbed cautiously in
at the window, he uncovered an ambuscade, in the person of his aunt;
and when she saw the state his clothes were in her resolution to turn
his Saturday holiday into captivity at hard labor became adamantine in
its firmness.



CHAPTER II

SATURDAY morning was come, and all the summer world was bright and
fresh, and brimming with life. There was a song in every heart; and if
the heart was young the music issued at the lips. There was cheer in
every face and a spring in every step. The locust-trees were in bloom
and the fragrance of the blossoms filled the air. Cardiff Hill, beyond
the village and above it, was green with vegetation and it lay just far
enough away to seem a Delectable Land, dreamy, reposeful, and inviting.

Tom appeared on the sidewalk with a bucket of whitewash and a
long-handled brush. He surveyed the fence, and all gladness left him and
a deep melancholy settled down upon his spirit. Thirty yards of board
fence nine feet high. Life to him seemed hollow, and existence but a
burden. Sighing, he dipped his brush and passed it along the topmost
plank; repeated the operation; did it again; compared the insignificant
whitewashed streak with the far-reaching continent of unwhitewashed
fence, and sat down on a tree-box discouraged. Jim came skipping out at
the gate with a tin pail, and singing Buffalo Gals. Bringing water from
the town pump had always been hateful work in Tom's eyes, before, but
now it did not strike him so. He remembered that there was company at
the pump. White, mulatto, and negro boys and girls were always there
waiting their turns, resting, trading playthings, quarrelling,
fighting, skylarking. And he remembered that although the pump was only
a hundred and fifty yards off, Jim never got back with a bucket of
water under an hour--and even then somebody generally had to go after
him. Tom said:

"Say, Jim, I'll fetch the water if you'll whitewash some."

Jim shook his head and said:

"Can't, Mars Tom. Ole missis, she tole me I got to go an' git dis
water an' not stop foolin' roun' wid anybody. She say she spec' Mars
Tom gwine to ax me to whitewash, an' so she tole me go 'long an' 'tend
to my own business--she 'lowed SHE'D 'tend to de whitewashin'."

"Oh, never you mind what she said, Jim. That's the way she always
talks. Gimme the bucket--I won't be gone only a a minute. SHE won't
ever know."

"Oh, I dasn't, Mars Tom. Ole missis she'd take an' tar de head off'n
me. 'Deed she would."

"SHE! She never licks anybody--whacks 'em over the head with her
thimble--and who cares for that, I'd like to know. She talks awful, but
talk don't hurt--anyways it don't if she don't cry. Jim, I'll give you
a marvel. I'll give you a white alley!"

Jim began to waver.

"White alley, Jim! And it's a bully taw."

"My! Dat's a mighty gay marvel, I tell you! But Mars Tom I's powerful
'fraid ole missis--"

"And besides, if you will I'll show you my sore toe."

Jim was only human--this attraction was too much for him. He put down
his pail, took the white alley, and bent over the toe with absorbing
interest while the bandage was being unwound. In another moment he was
flying down the street with his pail and a tingling rear, Tom was
whitewashing with vigor, and Aunt Polly was retiring from the field
with a slipper in her hand and triumph in her eye.

But Tom's energy did not last. He began to think of the fun he had
planned for this day, and his sorrows multiplied. Soon the free boys
would come tripping along on all sorts of delicious expeditions, and
they would make a world of fun of him for having to work--the very
thought of it burnt him like fire. He got out his worldly wealth and
examined it--bits of toys, marbles, and trash; enough to buy an
exchange of WORK, maybe, but not half enough to buy so much as half an
hour of pure freedom. So he returned his straitened means to his
pocket, and gave up the idea of trying to buy the boys. At this dark
and hopeless moment an inspiration burst upon him! Nothing less than a
great, magnificent inspiration.

He took up his brush and went tranquilly to work. Ben Rogers hove in
sight presently--the very boy, of all boys, whose ridicule he had been
dreading. Ben's gait was the hop-skip-and-jump--proof enough that his
heart was light and his anticipations high. He was eating an apple, and
giving a long, melodious whoop, at intervals, followed by a deep-toned
ding-dong-dong, ding-dong-dong, for he was personating a steamboat. As
he drew near, he slackened speed, took the middle of the street, leaned
far over to starboard and rounded to ponderously and with laborious
pomp and circumstance--for he was personating the Big Missouri, and
considered himself to be drawing nine feet of water. He was boat and
captain and engine-bells combined, so he had to imagine himself
standing on his own hurricane-deck giving the orders and executing them:

"Stop her, sir! Ting-a-ling-ling!" The headway ran almost out, and he
drew up slowly toward the sidewalk.

"Ship up to back! Ting-a-ling-ling!" His arms straightened and
stiffened down his sides.

"Set her back on the stabboard! Ting-a-ling-ling! Chow! ch-chow-wow!
Chow!" His right hand, meantime, describing stately circles--for it was
representing a forty-foot wheel.

"Let her go back on the labboard! Ting-a-lingling! Chow-ch-chow-chow!"
The left hand began to describe circles.

"Stop the stabboard! Ting-a-ling-ling! Stop the labboard! Come ahead
on the stabboard! Stop her! Let your outside turn over slow!
Ting-a-ling-ling! Chow-ow-ow! Get out that head-line! LIVELY now!
Come--out with your spring-line--what're you about there! Take a turn
round that stump with the bight of it! Stand by that stage, now--let her
go! Done with the engines, sir! Ting-a-ling-ling! SH'T! S'H'T! SH'T!"
(trying the gauge-cocks).

Tom went on whitewashing--paid no attention to the steamboat. Ben
stared a moment and then said: "Hi-YI! YOU'RE up a stump, ain't you!"

No answer. Tom surveyed his last touch with the eye of an artist, then
he gave his brush another gentle sweep and surveyed the result, as
before. Ben ranged up alongside of him. Tom's mouth watered for the
apple, but he stuck to his work. Ben said:

"Hello, old chap, you got to work, hey?"

Tom wheeled suddenly and said:

"Why, it's you, Ben! I warn't noticing."

"Say--I'm going in a-swimming, I am. Don't you wish you could? But of
course you'd druther WORK--wouldn't you? Course you would!"

Tom contemplated the boy a bit, and said:

"What do you call work?"

"Why, ain't THAT work?"

Tom resumed his whitewashing, and answered carelessly:

"Well, maybe it is, and maybe it ain't. All I know, is, it suits Tom
Sawyer."

"Oh come, now, you don't mean to let on that you LIKE it?"

The brush continued to move.

"Like it? Well, I don't see why I oughtn't to like it. Does a boy get
a chance to whitewash a fence every day?"

That put the thing in a new light. Ben stopped nibbling his apple. Tom
swept his brush daintily back and forth--stepped back to note the
effect--added a touch here and there--criticised the effect again--Ben
watching every move and getting more and more interested, more and more
absorbed. Presently he said:

"Say, Tom, let ME whitewash a little."

Tom considered, was about to consent; but he altered his mind:

"No--no--I reckon it wouldn't hardly do, Ben. You see, Aunt Polly's
awful particular about this fence--right here on the street, you know
--but if it was the back fence I wouldn't mind and SHE wouldn't. Yes,
she's awful particular about this fence; it's got to be done very
careful; I reckon there ain't one boy in a thousand, maybe two
thousand, that can do it the way it's got to be done."

"No--is that so? Oh come, now--lemme just try. Only just a little--I'd
let YOU, if you was me, Tom."

"Ben, I'd like to, honest injun; but Aunt Polly--well, Jim wanted to
do it, but she wouldn't let him; Sid wanted to do it, and she wouldn't
let Sid. Now don't you see how I'm fixed? If you was to tackle this
fence and anything was to happen to it--"

"Oh, shucks, I'll be just as careful. Now lemme try. Say--I'll give
you the core of my apple."

"Well, here--No, Ben, now don't. I'm afeard--"

"I'll give you ALL of it!"

Tom gave up the brush with reluctance in his face, but alacrity in his
heart. And while the late steamer Big Missouri worked and sweated in
the sun, the retired artist sat on a barrel in the shade close by,
dangled his legs, munched his apple, and planned the slaughter of more
innocents. There was no lack of material; boys happened along every
little while; they came to jeer, but remained to whitewash. By the time
Ben was fagged out, Tom had traded the next chance to Billy Fisher for
a kite, in good repair; and when he played out, Johnny Miller bought in
for a dead rat and a string to swing it with--and so on, and so on,
hour after hour. And when the middle of the afternoon came, from being
a poor poverty-stricken boy in the morning, Tom was literally rolling
in wealth. He had besides the things before mentioned, twelve marbles,
part of a jews-harp, a piece of blue bottle-glass to look through, a
spool cannon, a key that wouldn't unlock anything, a fragment of chalk,
a glass stopper of a decanter, a tin soldier, a couple of tadpoles, six
fire-crackers, a kitten with only one eye, a brass doorknob, a
dog-collar--but no dog--the handle of a knife, four pieces of
orange-peel, and a dilapidated old window sash.

He had had a nice, good, idle time all the while--plenty of company
--and the fence had three coats of whitewash on it! If he hadn't run out
of whitewash he would have bankrupted every boy in the village.

Tom said to himself that it was not such a hollow world, after all. He
had discovered a great law of human action, without knowing it--namely,
that in order to make a man or a boy covet a thing, it is only
necessary to make the thing difficult to attain. If he had been a great
and wise philosopher, like the writer of this book, he would now have
comprehended that Work consists of whatever a body is OBLIGED to do,
and that Play consists of whatever a body is not obliged to do. And
this would help him to understand why constructing artificial flowers
or performing on a tread-mill is work, while rolling ten-pins or
climbing Mont Blanc is only amusement. There are wealthy gentlemen in
England who drive four-horse passenger-coaches twenty or thirty miles
on a daily line, in the summer, because the privilege costs them
considerable money; but if they were offered wages for the service,
that would turn it into work and then they would resign.

The boy mused awhile over the substantial change which had taken place
in his worldly circumstances, and then wended toward headquarters to
report.



CHAPTER III

TOM presented himself before Aunt Polly, who was sitting by an open
window in a pleasant rearward apartment, which was bedroom,
breakfast-room, dining-room, and library, combined. The balmy summer
air, the restful quiet, the odor of the flowers, and the drowsing murmur
of the bees had had their effect, and she was nodding over her knitting
--for she had no company but the cat, and it was asleep in her lap. Her
spectacles were propped up on her gray head for safety. She had thought
that of course Tom had deserted long ago, and she wondered at seeing him
place himself in her power again in this intrepid way. He said: "Mayn't
I go and play now, aunt?"

"What, a'ready? How much have you done?"

"It's all done, aunt."

"Tom, don't lie to me--I can't bear it."

"I ain't, aunt; it IS all done."

Aunt Polly placed small trust in such evidence. She went out to see
for herself; and she would have been content to find twenty per cent.
of Tom's statement true. When she found the entire fence whitewashed,
and not only whitewashed but elaborately coated and recoated, and even
a streak added to the ground, her astonishment was almost unspeakable.
She said:

"Well, I never! There's no getting round it, you can work when you're
a mind to, Tom." And then she diluted the compliment by adding, "But
it's powerful seldom you're a mind to, I'm bound to say. Well, go 'long
and play; but mind you get back some time in a week, or I'll tan you."

She was so overcome by the splendor of his achievement that she took
him into the closet and selected a choice apple and delivered it to
him, along with an improving lecture upon the added value and flavor a
treat took to itself when it came without sin through virtuous effort.
And while she closed with a happy Scriptural flourish, he "hooked" a
doughnut.

Then he skipped out, and saw Sid just starting up the outside stairway
that led to the back rooms on the second floor. Clods were handy and
the air was full of them in a twinkling. They raged around Sid like a
hail-storm; and before Aunt Polly could collect her surprised faculties
and sally to the rescue, six or seven clods had taken personal effect,
and Tom was over the fence and gone. There was a gate, but as a general
thing he was too crowded for time to make use of it. His soul was at
peace, now that he had settled with Sid for calling attention to his
black thread and getting him into trouble.

Tom skirted the block, and came round into a muddy alley that led by
the back of his aunt's cow-stable. He presently got safely beyond the
reach of capture and punishment, and hastened toward the public square
of the village, where two "military" companies of boys had met for
conflict, according to previous appointment. Tom was General of one of
these armies, Joe Harper (a bosom friend) General of the other. These
two great commanders did not condescend to fight in person--that being
better suited to the still smaller fry--but sat together on an eminence
and conducted the field operations by orders delivered through
aides-de-camp. Tom's army won a great victory, after a long and
hard-fought battle. Then the dead were counted, prisoners exchanged,
the terms of the next disagreement agreed upon, and the day for the
necessary battle appointed; after which the armies fell into line and
marched away, and Tom turned homeward alone.

As he was passing by the house where Jeff Thatcher lived, he saw a new
girl in the garden--a lovely little blue-eyed creature with yellow hair
plaited into two long-tails, white summer frock and embroidered
pantalettes. The fresh-crowned hero fell without firing a shot. A
certain Amy Lawrence vanished out of his heart and left not even a
memory of herself behind. He had thought he loved her to distraction;
he had regarded his passion as adoration; and behold it was only a poor
little evanescent partiality. He had been months winning her; she had
confessed hardly a week ago; he had been the happiest and the proudest
boy in the world only seven short days, and here in one instant of time
she had gone out of his heart like a casual stranger whose visit is
done.

He worshipped this new angel with furtive eye, till he saw that she
had discovered him; then he pretended he did not know she was present,
and began to "show off" in all sorts of absurd boyish ways, in order to
win her admiration. He kept up this grotesque foolishness for some
time; but by-and-by, while he was in the midst of some dangerous
gymnastic performances, he glanced aside and saw that the little girl
was wending her way toward the house. Tom came up to the fence and
leaned on it, grieving, and hoping she would tarry yet awhile longer.
She halted a moment on the steps and then moved toward the door. Tom
heaved a great sigh as she put her foot on the threshold. But his face
lit up, right away, for she tossed a pansy over the fence a moment
before she disappeared.

The boy ran around and stopped within a foot or two of the flower, and
then shaded his eyes with his hand and began to look down street as if
he had discovered something of interest going on in that direction.
Presently he picked up a straw and began trying to balance it on his
nose, with his head tilted far back; and as he moved from side to side,
in his efforts, he edged nearer and nearer toward the pansy; finally
his bare foot rested upon it, his pliant toes closed upon it, and he
hopped away with the treasure and disappeared round the corner. But
only for a minute--only while he could button the flower inside his
jacket, next his heart--or next his stomach, possibly, for he was not
much posted in anatomy, and not hypercritical, anyway.

He returned, now, and hung about the fence till nightfall, "showing
off," as before; but the girl never exhibited herself again, though Tom
comforted himself a little with the hope that she had been near some
window, meantime, and been aware of his attentions. Finally he strode
home reluctantly, with his poor head full of visions.

All through supper his spirits were so high that his aunt wondered
"what had got into the child." He took a good scolding about clodding
Sid, and did not seem to mind it in the least. He tried to steal sugar
under his aunt's very nose, and got his knuckles rapped for it. He said:

"Aunt, you don't whack Sid when he takes it."

"Well, Sid don't torment a body the way you do. You'd be always into
that sugar if I warn't watching you."

Presently she stepped into the kitchen, and Sid, happy in his
immunity, reached for the sugar-bowl--a sort of glorying over Tom which
was wellnigh unbearable. But Sid's fingers slipped and the bowl dropped
and broke. Tom was in ecstasies. In such ecstasies that he even
controlled his tongue and was silent. He said to himself that he would
not speak a word, even when his aunt came in, but would sit perfectly
still till she asked who did the mischief; and then he would tell, and
there would be nothing so good in the world as to see that pet model
"catch it." He was so brimful of exultation that he could hardly hold
himself when the old lady came back and stood above the wreck
discharging lightnings of wrath from over her spectacles. He said to
himself, "Now it's coming!" And the next instant he was sprawling on
the floor! The potent palm was uplifted to strike again when Tom cried
out:

"Hold on, now, what 'er you belting ME for?--Sid broke it!"

Aunt Polly paused, perplexed, and Tom looked for healing pity. But
when she got her tongue again, she only said:

"Umf! Well, you didn't get a lick amiss, I reckon. You been into some
other audacious mischief when I wasn't around, like enough."

Then her conscience reproached her, and she yearned to say something
kind and loving; but she judged that this would be construed into a
confession that she had been in the wrong, and discipline forbade that.
So she kept silence, and went about her affairs with a troubled heart.
Tom sulked in a corner and exalted his woes. He knew that in her heart
his aunt was on her knees to him, and he was morosely gratified by the
consciousness of it. He would hang out no signals, he would take notice
of none. He knew that a yearning glance fell upon him, now and then,
through a film of tears, but he refused recognition of it. He pictured
himself lying sick unto death and his aunt bending over him beseeching
one little forgiving word, but he would turn his face to the wall, and
die with that word unsaid. Ah, how would she feel then? And he pictured
himself brought home from the river, dead, with his curls all wet, and
his sore heart at rest. How she would throw herself upon him, and how
her tears would fall like rain, and her lips pray God to give her back
her boy and she would never, never abuse him any more! But he would lie
there cold and white and make no sign--a poor little sufferer, whose
griefs were at an end. He so worked upon his feelings with the pathos
of these dreams, that he had to keep swallowing, he was so like to
choke; and his eyes swam in a blur of water, which overflowed when he
winked, and ran down and trickled from the end of his nose. And such a
luxury to him was this petting of his sorrows, that he could not bear
to have any worldly cheeriness or any grating delight intrude upon it;
it was too sacred for such contact; and so, presently, when his cousin
Mary danced in, all alive with the joy of seeing home again after an
age-long visit of one week to the country, he got up and moved in
clouds and darkness out at one door as she brought song and sunshine in
at the other.

He wandered far from the accustomed haunts of boys, and sought
desolate places that were in harmony with his spirit. A log raft in the
river invited him, and he seated himself on its outer edge and
contemplated the dreary vastness of the stream, wishing, the while,
that he could only be drowned, all at once and unconsciously, without
undergoing the uncomfortable routine devised by nature. Then he thought
of his flower. He got it out, rumpled and wilted, and it mightily
increased his dismal felicity. He wondered if she would pity him if she
knew? Would she cry, and wish that she had a right to put her arms
around his neck and comfort him? Or would she turn coldly away like all
the hollow world? This picture brought such an agony of pleasurable
suffering that he worked it over and over again in his mind and set it
up in new and varied lights, till he wore it threadbare. At last he
rose up sighing and departed in the darkness.

About half-past nine or ten o'clock he came along the deserted street
to where the Adored Unknown lived; he paused a moment; no sound fell
upon his listening ear; a candle was casting a dull glow upon the
curtain of a second-story window. Was the sacred presence there? He
climbed the fence, threaded his stealthy way through the plants, till
he stood under that window; he looked up at it long, and with emotion;
then he laid him down on the ground under it, disposing himself upon
his back, with his hands clasped upon his breast and holding his poor
wilted flower. And thus he would die--out in the cold world, with no
shelter over his homeless head, no friendly hand to wipe the
death-damps from his brow, no loving face to bend pityingly over him
when the great agony came. And thus SHE would see him when she looked
out upon the glad morning, and oh! would she drop one little tear upon
his poor, lifeless form, would she heave one little sigh to see a bright
young life so rudely blighted, so untimely cut down?

The window went up, a maid-servant's discordant voice profaned the
holy calm, and a deluge of water drenched the prone martyr's remains!

The strangling hero sprang up with a relieving snort. There was a whiz
as of a missile in the air, mingled with the murmur of a curse, a sound
as of shivering glass followed, and a small, vague form went over the
fence and shot away in the gloom.

Not long after, as Tom, all undressed for bed, was surveying his
drenched garments by the light of a tallow dip, Sid woke up; but if he
had any dim idea of making any "references to allusions," he thought
better of it and held his peace, for there was danger in Tom's eye.

Tom turned in without the added vexation of prayers, and Sid made
mental note of the omission.



CHAPTER IV

THE sun rose upon a tranquil world, and beamed down upon the peaceful
village like a benediction. Breakfast over, Aunt Polly had family
worship: it began with a prayer built from the ground up of solid
courses of Scriptural quotations, welded together with a thin mortar of
originality; and from the summit of this she delivered a grim chapter
of the Mosaic Law, as from Sinai.

Then Tom girded up his loins, so to speak, and went to work to "get
his verses." Sid had learned his lesson days before. Tom bent all his
energies to the memorizing of five verses, and he chose part of the
Sermon on the Mount, because he could find no verses that were shorter.
At the end of half an hour Tom had a vague general idea of his lesson,
but no more, for his mind was traversing the whole field of human
thought, and his hands were busy with distracting recreations. Mary
took his book to hear him recite, and he tried to find his way through
the fog:

"Blessed are the--a--a--"

"Poor"--

"Yes--poor; blessed are the poor--a--a--"

"In spirit--"

"In spirit; blessed are the poor in spirit, for they--they--"

"THEIRS--"

"For THEIRS. Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the kingdom
of heaven. Blessed are they that mourn, for they--they--"

"Sh--"

"For they--a--"

"S, H, A--"

"For they S, H--Oh, I don't know what it is!"

"SHALL!"

"Oh, SHALL! for they shall--for they shall--a--a--shall mourn--a--a--
blessed are they that shall--they that--a--they that shall mourn, for
they shall--a--shall WHAT? Why don't you tell me, Mary?--what do you
want to be so mean for?"

"Oh, Tom, you poor thick-headed thing, I'm not teasing you. I wouldn't
do that. You must go and learn it again. Don't you be discouraged, Tom,
you'll manage it--and if you do, I'll give you something ever so nice.
There, now, that's a good boy."

"All right! What is it, Mary, tell me what it is."

"Never you mind, Tom. You know if I say it's nice, it is nice."

"You bet you that's so, Mary. All right, I'll tackle it again."

And he did "tackle it again"--and under the double pressure of
curiosity and prospective gain he did it with such spirit that he
accomplished a shining success. Mary gave him a brand-new "Barlow"
knife worth twelve and a half cents; and the convulsion of delight that
swept his system shook him to his foundations. True, the knife would
not cut anything, but it was a "sure-enough" Barlow, and there was
inconceivable grandeur in that--though where the Western boys ever got
the idea that such a weapon could possibly be counterfeited to its
injury is an imposing mystery and will always remain so, perhaps. Tom
contrived to scarify the cupboard with it, and was arranging to begin
on the bureau, when he was called off to dress for Sunday-school.

Mary gave him a tin basin of water and a piece of soap, and he went
outside the door and set the basin on a little bench there; then he
dipped the soap in the water and laid it down; turned up his sleeves;
poured out the water on the ground, gently, and then entered the
kitchen and began to wipe his face diligently on the towel behind the
door. But Mary removed the towel and said:

"Now ain't you ashamed, Tom. You mustn't be so bad. Water won't hurt
you."

Tom was a trifle disconcerted. The basin was refilled, and this time
he stood over it a little while, gathering resolution; took in a big
breath and began. When he entered the kitchen presently, with both eyes
shut and groping for the towel with his hands, an honorable testimony
of suds and water was dripping from his face. But when he emerged from
the towel, he was not yet satisfactory, for the clean territory stopped
short at his chin and his jaws, like a mask; below and beyond this line
there was a dark expanse of unirrigated soil that spread downward in
front and backward around his neck. Mary took him in hand, and when she
was done with him he was a man and a brother, without distinction of
color, and his saturated hair was neatly brushed, and its short curls
wrought into a dainty and symmetrical general effect. [He privately
smoothed out the curls, with labor and difficulty, and plastered his
hair close down to his head; for he held curls to be effeminate, and
his own filled his life with bitterness.] Then Mary got out a suit of
his clothing that had been used only on Sundays during two years--they
were simply called his "other clothes"--and so by that we know the
size of his wardrobe. The girl "put him to rights" after he had dressed
himself; she buttoned his neat roundabout up to his chin, turned his
vast shirt collar down over his shoulders, brushed him off and crowned
him with his speckled straw hat. He now looked exceedingly improved and
uncomfortable. He was fully as uncomfortable as he looked; for there
was a restraint about whole clothes and cleanliness that galled him. He
hoped that Mary would forget his shoes, but the hope was blighted; she
coated them thoroughly with tallow, as was the custom, and brought them
out. He lost his temper and said he was always being made to do
everything he didn't want to do. But Mary said, persuasively:

"Please, Tom--that's a good boy."

So he got into the shoes snarling. Mary was soon ready, and the three
children set out for Sunday-school--a place that Tom hated with his
whole heart; but Sid and Mary were fond of it.

Sabbath-school hours were from nine to half-past ten; and then church
service. Two of the children always remained for the sermon
voluntarily, and the other always remained too--for stronger reasons.
The church's high-backed, uncushioned pews would seat about three
hundred persons; the edifice was but a small, plain affair, with a sort
of pine board tree-box on top of it for a steeple. At the door Tom
dropped back a step and accosted a Sunday-dressed comrade:

"Say, Billy, got a yaller ticket?"

"Yes."

"What'll you take for her?"

"What'll you give?"

"Piece of lickrish and a fish-hook."

"Less see 'em."

Tom exhibited. They were satisfactory, and the property changed hands.
Then Tom traded a couple of white alleys for three red tickets, and
some small trifle or other for a couple of blue ones. He waylaid other
boys as they came, and went on buying tickets of various colors ten or
fifteen minutes longer. He entered the church, now, with a swarm of
clean and noisy boys and girls, proceeded to his seat and started a
quarrel with the first boy that came handy. The teacher, a grave,
elderly man, interfered; then turned his back a moment and Tom pulled a
boy's hair in the next bench, and was absorbed in his book when the boy
turned around; stuck a pin in another boy, presently, in order to hear
him say "Ouch!" and got a new reprimand from his teacher. Tom's whole
class were of a pattern--restless, noisy, and troublesome. When they
came to recite their lessons, not one of them knew his verses
perfectly, but had to be prompted all along. However, they worried
through, and each got his reward--in small blue tickets, each with a
passage of Scripture on it; each blue ticket was pay for two verses of
the recitation. Ten blue tickets equalled a red one, and could be
exchanged for it; ten red tickets equalled a yellow one; for ten yellow
tickets the superintendent gave a very plainly bound Bible (worth forty
cents in those easy times) to the pupil. How many of my readers would
have the industry and application to memorize two thousand verses, even
for a Dore Bible? And yet Mary had acquired two Bibles in this way--it
was the patient work of two years--and a boy of German parentage had
won four or five. He once recited three thousand verses without
stopping; but the strain upon his mental faculties was too great, and
he was little better than an idiot from that day forth--a grievous
misfortune for the school, for on great occasions, before company, the
superintendent (as Tom expressed it) had always made this boy come out
and "spread himself." Only the older pupils managed to keep their
tickets and stick to their tedious work long enough to get a Bible, and
so the delivery of one of these prizes was a rare and noteworthy
circumstance; the successful pupil was so great and conspicuous for
that day that on the spot every scholar's heart was fired with a fresh
ambition that often lasted a couple of weeks. It is possible that Tom's
mental stomach had never really hungered for one of those prizes, but
unquestionably his entire being had for many a day longed for the glory
and the eclat that came with it.

In due course the superintendent stood up in front of the pulpit, with
a closed hymn-book in his hand and his forefinger inserted between its
leaves, and commanded attention. When a Sunday-school superintendent
makes his customary little speech, a hymn-book in the hand is as
necessary as is the inevitable sheet of music in the hand of a singer
who stands forward on the platform and sings a solo at a concert
--though why, is a mystery: for neither the hymn-book nor the sheet of
music is ever referred to by the sufferer. This superintendent was a
slim creature of thirty-five, with a sandy goatee and short sandy hair;
he wore a stiff standing-collar whose upper edge almost reached his
ears and whose sharp points curved forward abreast the corners of his
mouth--a fence that compelled a straight lookout ahead, and a turning
of the whole body when a side view was required; his chin was propped
on a spreading cravat which was as broad and as long as a bank-note,
and had fringed ends; his boot toes were turned sharply up, in the
fashion of the day, like sleigh-runners--an effect patiently and
laboriously produced by the young men by sitting with their toes
pressed against a wall for hours together. Mr. Walters was very earnest
of mien, and very sincere and honest at heart; and he held sacred
things and places in such reverence, and so separated them from worldly
matters, that unconsciously to himself his Sunday-school voice had
acquired a peculiar intonation which was wholly absent on week-days. He
began after this fashion:

"Now, children, I want you all to sit up just as straight and pretty
as you can and give me all your attention for a minute or two. There
--that is it. That is the way good little boys and girls should do. I see
one little girl who is looking out of the window--I am afraid she
thinks I am out there somewhere--perhaps up in one of the trees making
a speech to the little birds. [Applausive titter.] I want to tell you
how good it makes me feel to see so many bright, clean little faces
assembled in a place like this, learning to do right and be good." And
so forth and so on. It is not necessary to set down the rest of the
oration. It was of a pattern which does not vary, and so it is familiar
to us all.

The latter third of the speech was marred by the resumption of fights
and other recreations among certain of the bad boys, and by fidgetings
and whisperings that extended far and wide, washing even to the bases
of isolated and incorruptible rocks like Sid and Mary. But now every
sound ceased suddenly, with the subsidence of Mr. Walters' voice, and
the conclusion of the speech was received with a burst of silent
gratitude.

A good part of the whispering had been occasioned by an event which
was more or less rare--the entrance of visitors: lawyer Thatcher,
accompanied by a very feeble and aged man; a fine, portly, middle-aged
gentleman with iron-gray hair; and a dignified lady who was doubtless
the latter's wife. The lady was leading a child. Tom had been restless
and full of chafings and repinings; conscience-smitten, too--he could
not meet Amy Lawrence's eye, he could not brook her loving gaze. But
when he saw this small new-comer his soul was all ablaze with bliss in
a moment. The next moment he was "showing off" with all his might
--cuffing boys, pulling hair, making faces--in a word, using every art
that seemed likely to fascinate a girl and win her applause. His
exaltation had but one alloy--the memory of his humiliation in this
angel's garden--and that record in sand was fast washing out, under
the waves of happiness that were sweeping over it now.

The visitors were given the highest seat of honor, and as soon as Mr.
Walters' speech was finished, he introduced them to the school. The
middle-aged man turned out to be a prodigious personage--no less a one
than the county judge--altogether the most august creation these
children had ever looked upon--and they wondered what kind of material
he was made of--and they half wanted to hear him roar, and were half
afraid he might, too. He was from Constantinople, twelve miles away--so
he had travelled, and seen the world--these very eyes had looked upon
the county court-house--which was said to have a tin roof. The awe
which these reflections inspired was attested by the impressive silence
and the ranks of staring eyes. This was the great Judge Thatcher,
brother of their own lawyer. Jeff Thatcher immediately went forward, to
be familiar with the great man and be envied by the school. It would
have been music to his soul to hear the whisperings:

"Look at him, Jim! He's a going up there. Say--look! he's a going to
shake hands with him--he IS shaking hands with him! By jings, don't you
wish you was Jeff?"

Mr. Walters fell to "showing off," with all sorts of official
bustlings and activities, giving orders, delivering judgments,
discharging directions here, there, everywhere that he could find a
target. The librarian "showed off"--running hither and thither with his
arms full of books and making a deal of the splutter and fuss that
insect authority delights in. The young lady teachers "showed off"
--bending sweetly over pupils that were lately being boxed, lifting
pretty warning fingers at bad little boys and patting good ones
lovingly. The young gentlemen teachers "showed off" with small
scoldings and other little displays of authority and fine attention to
discipline--and most of the teachers, of both sexes, found business up
at the library, by the pulpit; and it was business that frequently had
to be done over again two or three times (with much seeming vexation).
The little girls "showed off" in various ways, and the little boys
"showed off" with such diligence that the air was thick with paper wads
and the murmur of scufflings. And above it all the great man sat and
beamed a majestic judicial smile upon all the house, and warmed himself
in the sun of his own grandeur--for he was "showing off," too.

There was only one thing wanting to make Mr. Walters' ecstasy
complete, and that was a chance to deliver a Bible-prize and exhibit a
prodigy. Several pupils had a few yellow tickets, but none had enough
--he had been around among the star pupils inquiring. He would have given
worlds, now, to have that German lad back again with a sound mind.

And now at this moment, when hope was dead, Tom Sawyer came forward
with nine yellow tickets, nine red tickets, and ten blue ones, and
demanded a Bible. This was a thunderbolt out of a clear sky. Walters
was not expecting an application from this source for the next ten
years. But there was no getting around it--here were the certified
checks, and they were good for their face. Tom was therefore elevated
to a place with the Judge and the other elect, and the great news was
announced from headquarters. It was the most stunning surprise of the
decade, and so profound was the sensation that it lifted the new hero
up to the judicial one's altitude, and the school had two marvels to
gaze upon in place of one. The boys were all eaten up with envy--but
those that suffered the bitterest pangs were those who perceived too
late that they themselves had contributed to this hated splendor by
trading tickets to Tom for the wealth he had amassed in selling
whitewashing privileges. These despised themselves, as being the dupes
of a wily fraud, a guileful snake in the grass.

The prize was delivered to Tom with as much effusion as the
superintendent could pump up under the circumstances; but it lacked
somewhat of the true gush, for the poor fellow's instinct taught him
that there was a mystery here that could not well bear the light,
perhaps; it was simply preposterous that this boy had warehoused two
thousand sheaves of Scriptural wisdom on his premises--a dozen would
strain his capacity, without a doubt.

Amy Lawrence was proud and glad, and she tried to make Tom see it in
her face--but he wouldn't look. She wondered; then she was just a grain
troubled; next a dim suspicion came and went--came again; she watched;
a furtive glance told her worlds--and then her heart broke, and she was
jealous, and angry, and the tears came and she hated everybody. Tom
most of all (she thought).

Tom was introduced to the Judge; but his tongue was tied, his breath
would hardly come, his heart quaked--partly because of the awful
greatness of the man, but mainly because he was her parent. He would
have liked to fall down and worship him, if it were in the dark. The
Judge put his hand on Tom's head and called him a fine little man, and
asked him what his name was. The boy stammered, gasped, and got it out:

"Tom."

"Oh, no, not Tom--it is--"

"Thomas."

"Ah, that's it. I thought there was more to it, maybe. That's very
well. But you've another one I daresay, and you'll tell it to me, won't
you?"

"Tell the gentleman your other name, Thomas," said Walters, "and say
sir. You mustn't forget your manners."

"Thomas Sawyer--sir."

"That's it! That's a good boy. Fine boy. Fine, manly little fellow.
Two thousand verses is a great many--very, very great many. And you
never can be sorry for the trouble you took to learn them; for
knowledge is worth more than anything there is in the world; it's what
makes great men and good men; you'll be a great man and a good man
yourself, some day, Thomas, and then you'll look back and say, It's all
owing to the precious Sunday-school privileges of my boyhood--it's all
owing to my dear teachers that taught me to learn--it's all owing to
the good superintendent, who encouraged me, and watched over me, and
gave me a beautiful Bible--a splendid elegant Bible--to keep and have
it all for my own, always--it's all owing to right bringing up! That is
what you will say, Thomas--and you wouldn't take any money for those
two thousand verses--no indeed you wouldn't. And now you wouldn't mind
telling me and this lady some of the things you've learned--no, I know
you wouldn't--for we are proud of little boys that learn. Now, no
doubt you know the names of all the twelve disciples. Won't you tell us
the names of the first two that were appointed?"

Tom was tugging at a button-hole and looking sheepish. He blushed,
now, and his eyes fell. Mr. Walters' heart sank within him. He said to
himself, it is not possible that the boy can answer the simplest
question--why DID the Judge ask him? Yet he felt obliged to speak up
and say:

"Answer the gentleman, Thomas--don't be afraid."

Tom still hung fire.

"Now I know you'll tell me," said the lady. "The names of the first
two disciples were--"

"DAVID AND GOLIAH!"

Let us draw the curtain of charity over the rest of the scene.



CHAPTER V

ABOUT half-past ten the cracked bell of the small church began to
ring, and presently the people began to gather for the morning sermon.
The Sunday-school children distributed themselves about the house and
occupied pews with their parents, so as to be under supervision. Aunt
Polly came, and Tom and Sid and Mary sat with her--Tom being placed
next the aisle, in order that he might be as far away from the open
window and the seductive outside summer scenes as possible. The crowd
filed up the aisles: the aged and needy postmaster, who had seen better
days; the mayor and his wife--for they had a mayor there, among other
unnecessaries; the justice of the peace; the widow Douglass, fair,
smart, and forty, a generous, good-hearted soul and well-to-do, her
hill mansion the only palace in the town, and the most hospitable and
much the most lavish in the matter of festivities that St. Petersburg
could boast; the bent and venerable Major and Mrs. Ward; lawyer
Riverson, the new notable from a distance; next the belle of the
village, followed by a troop of lawn-clad and ribbon-decked young
heart-breakers; then all the young clerks in town in a body--for they
had stood in the vestibule sucking their cane-heads, a circling wall of
oiled and simpering admirers, till the last girl had run their gantlet;
and last of all came the Model Boy, Willie Mufferson, taking as heedful
care of his mother as if she were cut glass. He always brought his
mother to church, and was the pride of all the matrons. The boys all
hated him, he was so good. And besides, he had been "thrown up to them"
so much. His white handkerchief was hanging out of his pocket behind, as
usual on Sundays--accidentally. Tom had no handkerchief, and he looked
upon boys who had as snobs.

The congregation being fully assembled, now, the bell rang once more,
to warn laggards and stragglers, and then a solemn hush fell upon the
church which was only broken by the tittering and whispering of the
choir in the gallery. The choir always tittered and whispered all
through service. There was once a church choir that was not ill-bred,
but I have forgotten where it was, now. It was a great many years ago,
and I can scarcely remember anything about it, but I think it was in
some foreign country.

The minister gave out the hymn, and read it through with a relish, in
a peculiar style which was much admired in that part of the country.
His voice began on a medium key and climbed steadily up till it reached
a certain point, where it bore with strong emphasis upon the topmost
word and then plunged down as if from a spring-board:

  Shall I be car-ri-ed toe the skies, on flow'ry BEDS of ease,

  Whilst others fight to win the prize, and sail thro' BLOODY seas?

He was regarded as a wonderful reader. At church "sociables" he was
always called upon to read poetry; and when he was through, the ladies
would lift up their hands and let them fall helplessly in their laps,
and "wall" their eyes, and shake their heads, as much as to say, "Words
cannot express it; it is too beautiful, TOO beautiful for this mortal
earth."

After the hymn had been sung, the Rev. Mr. Sprague turned himself into
a bulletin-board, and read off "notices" of meetings and societies and
things till it seemed that the list would stretch out to the crack of
doom--a queer custom which is still kept up in America, even in cities,
away here in this age of abundant newspapers. Often, the less there is
to justify a traditional custom, the harder it is to get rid of it.

And now the minister prayed. A good, generous prayer it was, and went
into details: it pleaded for the church, and the little children of the
church; for the other churches of the village; for the village itself;
for the county; for the State; for the State officers; for the United
States; for the churches of the United States; for Congress; for the
President; for the officers of the Government; for poor sailors, tossed
by stormy seas; for the oppressed millions groaning under the heel of
European monarchies and Oriental despotisms; for such as have the light
and the good tidings, and yet have not eyes to see nor ears to hear
withal; for the heathen in the far islands of the sea; and closed with
a supplication that the words he was about to speak might find grace
and favor, and be as seed sown in fertile ground, yielding in time a
grateful harvest of good. Amen.

There was a rustling of dresses, and the standing congregation sat
down. The boy whose history this book relates did not enjoy the prayer,
he only endured it--if he even did that much. He was restive all
through it; he kept tally of the details of the prayer, unconsciously
--for he was not listening, but he knew the ground of old, and the
clergyman's regular route over it--and when a little trifle of new
matter was interlarded, his ear detected it and his whole nature
resented it; he considered additions unfair, and scoundrelly. In the
midst of the prayer a fly had lit on the back of the pew in front of
him and tortured his spirit by calmly rubbing its hands together,
embracing its head with its arms, and polishing it so vigorously that
it seemed to almost part company with the body, and the slender thread
of a neck was exposed to view; scraping its wings with its hind legs
and smoothing them to its body as if they had been coat-tails; going
through its whole toilet as tranquilly as if it knew it was perfectly
safe. As indeed it was; for as sorely as Tom's hands itched to grab for
it they did not dare--he believed his soul would be instantly destroyed
if he did such a thing while the prayer was going on. But with the
closing sentence his hand began to curve and steal forward; and the
instant the "Amen" was out the fly was a prisoner of war. His aunt
detected the act and made him let it go.

The minister gave out his text and droned along monotonously through
an argument that was so prosy that many a head by and by began to nod
--and yet it was an argument that dealt in limitless fire and brimstone
and thinned the predestined elect down to a company so small as to be
hardly worth the saving. Tom counted the pages of the sermon; after
church he always knew how many pages there had been, but he seldom knew
anything else about the discourse. However, this time he was really
interested for a little while. The minister made a grand and moving
picture of the assembling together of the world's hosts at the
millennium when the lion and the lamb should lie down together and a
little child should lead them. But the pathos, the lesson, the moral of
the great spectacle were lost upon the boy; he only thought of the
conspicuousness of the principal character before the on-looking
nations; his face lit with the thought, and he said to himself that he
wished he could be that child, if it was a tame lion.

Now he lapsed into suffering again, as the dry argument was resumed.
Presently he bethought him of a treasure he had and got it out. It was
a large black beetle with formidable jaws--a "pinchbug," he called it.
It was in a percussion-cap box. The first thing the beetle did was to
take him by the finger. A natural fillip followed, the beetle went
floundering into the aisle and lit on its back, and the hurt finger
went into the boy's mouth. The beetle lay there working its helpless
legs, unable to turn over. Tom eyed it, and longed for it; but it was
safe out of his reach. Other people uninterested in the sermon found
relief in the beetle, and they eyed it too. Presently a vagrant poodle
dog came idling along, sad at heart, lazy with the summer softness and
the quiet, weary of captivity, sighing for change. He spied the beetle;
the drooping tail lifted and wagged. He surveyed the prize; walked
around it; smelt at it from a safe distance; walked around it again;
grew bolder, and took a closer smell; then lifted his lip and made a
gingerly snatch at it, just missing it; made another, and another;
began to enjoy the diversion; subsided to his stomach with the beetle
between his paws, and continued his experiments; grew weary at last,
and then indifferent and absent-minded. His head nodded, and little by
little his chin descended and touched the enemy, who seized it. There
was a sharp yelp, a flirt of the poodle's head, and the beetle fell a
couple of yards away, and lit on its back once more. The neighboring
spectators shook with a gentle inward joy, several faces went behind
fans and handkerchiefs, and Tom was entirely happy. The dog looked
foolish, and probably felt so; but there was resentment in his heart,
too, and a craving for revenge. So he went to the beetle and began a
wary attack on it again; jumping at it from every point of a circle,
lighting with his fore-paws within an inch of the creature, making even
closer snatches at it with his teeth, and jerking his head till his
ears flapped again. But he grew tired once more, after a while; tried
to amuse himself with a fly but found no relief; followed an ant
around, with his nose close to the floor, and quickly wearied of that;
yawned, sighed, forgot the beetle entirely, and sat down on it. Then
there was a wild yelp of agony and the poodle went sailing up the
aisle; the yelps continued, and so did the dog; he crossed the house in
front of the altar; he flew down the other aisle; he crossed before the
doors; he clamored up the home-stretch; his anguish grew with his
progress, till presently he was but a woolly comet moving in its orbit
with the gleam and the speed of light. At last the frantic sufferer
sheered from its course, and sprang into its master's lap; he flung it
out of the window, and the voice of distress quickly thinned away and
died in the distance.

By this time the whole church was red-faced and suffocating with
suppressed laughter, and the sermon had come to a dead standstill. The
discourse was resumed presently, but it went lame and halting, all
possibility of impressiveness being at an end; for even the gravest
sentiments were constantly being received with a smothered burst of
unholy mirth, under cover of some remote pew-back, as if the poor
parson had said a rarely facetious thing. It was a genuine relief to
the whole congregation when the ordeal was over and the benediction
pronounced.

Tom Sawyer went home quite cheerful, thinking to himself that there
was some satisfaction about divine service when there was a bit of
variety in it. He had but one marring thought; he was willing that the
dog should play with his pinchbug, but he did not think it was upright
in him to carry it off.



CHAPTER VI

MONDAY morning found Tom Sawyer miserable. Monday morning always found
him so--because it began another week's slow suffering in school. He
generally began that day with wishing he had had no intervening
holiday, it made the going into captivity and fetters again so much
more odious.

Tom lay thinking. Presently it occurred to him that he wished he was
sick; then he could stay home from school. Here was a vague
possibility. He canvassed his system. No ailment was found, and he
investigated again. This time he thought he could detect colicky
symptoms, and he began to encourage them with considerable hope. But
they soon grew feeble, and presently died wholly away. He reflected
further. Suddenly he discovered something. One of his upper front teeth
was loose. This was lucky; he was about to begin to groan, as a
"starter," as he called it, when it occurred to him that if he came
into court with that argument, his aunt would pull it out, and that
would hurt. So he thought he would hold the tooth in reserve for the
present, and seek further. Nothing offered for some little time, and
then he remembered hearing the doctor tell about a certain thing that
laid up a patient for two or three weeks and threatened to make him
lose a finger. So the boy eagerly drew his sore toe from under the
sheet and held it up for inspection. But now he did not know the
necessary symptoms. However, it seemed well worth while to chance it,
so he fell to groaning with considerable spirit.

But Sid slept on unconscious.

Tom groaned louder, and fancied that he began to feel pain in the toe.

No result from Sid.

Tom was panting with his exertions by this time. He took a rest and
then swelled himself up and fetched a succession of admirable groans.

Sid snored on.

Tom was aggravated. He said, "Sid, Sid!" and shook him. This course
worked well, and Tom began to groan again. Sid yawned, stretched, then
brought himself up on his elbow with a snort, and began to stare at
Tom. Tom went on groaning. Sid said:

"Tom! Say, Tom!" [No response.] "Here, Tom! TOM! What is the matter,
Tom?" And he shook him and looked in his face anxiously.

Tom moaned out:

"Oh, don't, Sid. Don't joggle me."

"Why, what's the matter, Tom? I must call auntie."

"No--never mind. It'll be over by and by, maybe. Don't call anybody."

"But I must! DON'T groan so, Tom, it's awful. How long you been this
way?"

"Hours. Ouch! Oh, don't stir so, Sid, you'll kill me."

"Tom, why didn't you wake me sooner? Oh, Tom, DON'T! It makes my
flesh crawl to hear you. Tom, what is the matter?"

"I forgive you everything, Sid. [Groan.] Everything you've ever done
to me. When I'm gone--"

"Oh, Tom, you ain't dying, are you? Don't, Tom--oh, don't. Maybe--"

"I forgive everybody, Sid. [Groan.] Tell 'em so, Sid. And Sid, you
give my window-sash and my cat with one eye to that new girl that's
come to town, and tell her--"

But Sid had snatched his clothes and gone. Tom was suffering in
reality, now, so handsomely was his imagination working, and so his
groans had gathered quite a genuine tone.

Sid flew down-stairs and said:

"Oh, Aunt Polly, come! Tom's dying!"

"Dying!"

"Yes'm. Don't wait--come quick!"

"Rubbage! I don't believe it!"

But she fled up-stairs, nevertheless, with Sid and Mary at her heels.
And her face grew white, too, and her lip trembled. When she reached
the bedside she gasped out:

"You, Tom! Tom, what's the matter with you?"

"Oh, auntie, I'm--"

"What's the matter with you--what is the matter with you, child?"

"Oh, auntie, my sore toe's mortified!"

The old lady sank down into a chair and laughed a little, then cried a
little, then did both together. This restored her and she said:

"Tom, what a turn you did give me. Now you shut up that nonsense and
climb out of this."

The groans ceased and the pain vanished from the toe. The boy felt a
little foolish, and he said:

"Aunt Polly, it SEEMED mortified, and it hurt so I never minded my
tooth at all."

"Your tooth, indeed! What's the matter with your tooth?"

"One of them's loose, and it aches perfectly awful."

"There, there, now, don't begin that groaning again. Open your mouth.
Well--your tooth IS loose, but you're not going to die about that.
Mary, get me a silk thread, and a chunk of fire out of the kitchen."

Tom said:

"Oh, please, auntie, don't pull it out. It don't hurt any more. I wish
I may never stir if it does. Please don't, auntie. I don't want to stay
home from school."

"Oh, you don't, don't you? So all this row was because you thought
you'd get to stay home from school and go a-fishing? Tom, Tom, I love
you so, and you seem to try every way you can to break my old heart
with your outrageousness." By this time the dental instruments were
ready. The old lady made one end of the silk thread fast to Tom's tooth
with a loop and tied the other to the bedpost. Then she seized the
chunk of fire and suddenly thrust it almost into the boy's face. The
tooth hung dangling by the bedpost, now.

But all trials bring their compensations. As Tom wended to school
after breakfast, he was the envy of every boy he met because the gap in
his upper row of teeth enabled him to expectorate in a new and
admirable way. He gathered quite a following of lads interested in the
exhibition; and one that had cut his finger and had been a centre of
fascination and homage up to this time, now found himself suddenly
without an adherent, and shorn of his glory. His heart was heavy, and
he said with a disdain which he did not feel that it wasn't anything to
spit like Tom Sawyer; but another boy said, "Sour grapes!" and he
wandered away a dismantled hero.

Shortly Tom came upon the juvenile pariah of the village, Huckleberry
Finn, son of the town drunkard. Huckleberry was cordially hated and
dreaded by all the mothers of the town, because he was idle and lawless
and vulgar and bad--and because all their children admired him so, and
delighted in his forbidden society, and wished they dared to be like
him. Tom was like the rest of the respectable boys, in that he envied
Huckleberry his gaudy outcast condition, and was under strict orders
not to play with him. So he played with him every time he got a chance.
Huckleberry was always dressed in the cast-off clothes of full-grown
men, and they were in perennial bloom and fluttering with rags. His hat
was a vast ruin with a wide crescent lopped out of its brim; his coat,
when he wore one, hung nearly to his heels and had the rearward buttons
far down the back; but one suspender supported his trousers; the seat
of the trousers bagged low and contained nothing, the fringed legs
dragged in the dirt when not rolled up.

Huckleberry came and went, at his own free will. He slept on doorsteps
in fine weather and in empty hogsheads in wet; he did not have to go to
school or to church, or call any being master or obey anybody; he could
go fishing or swimming when and where he chose, and stay as long as it
suited him; nobody forbade him to fight; he could sit up as late as he
pleased; he was always the first boy that went barefoot in the spring
and the last to resume leather in the fall; he never had to wash, nor
put on clean clothes; he could swear wonderfully. In a word, everything
that goes to make life precious that boy had. So thought every
harassed, hampered, respectable boy in St. Petersburg.

Tom hailed the romantic outcast:

"Hello, Huckleberry!"

"Hello yourself, and see how you like it."

"What's that you got?"

"Dead cat."

"Lemme see him, Huck. My, he's pretty stiff. Where'd you get him ?"

"Bought him off'n a boy."

"What did you give?"

"I give a blue ticket and a bladder that I got at the slaughter-house."

"Where'd you get the blue ticket?"

"Bought it off'n Ben Rogers two weeks ago for a hoop-stick."

"Say--what is dead cats good for, Huck?"

"Good for? Cure warts with."

"No! Is that so? I know something that's better."

"I bet you don't. What is it?"

"Why, spunk-water."

"Spunk-water! I wouldn't give a dern for spunk-water."

"You wouldn't, wouldn't you? D'you ever try it?"

"No, I hain't. But Bob Tanner did."

"Who told you so!"

"Why, he told Jeff Thatcher, and Jeff told Johnny Baker, and Johnny
told Jim Hollis, and Jim told Ben Rogers, and Ben told a nigger, and
the nigger told me. There now!"

"Well, what of it? They'll all lie. Leastways all but the nigger. I
don't know HIM. But I never see a nigger that WOULDN'T lie. Shucks! Now
you tell me how Bob Tanner done it, Huck."

"Why, he took and dipped his hand in a rotten stump where the
rain-water was."

"In the daytime?"

"Certainly."

"With his face to the stump?"

"Yes. Least I reckon so."

"Did he say anything?"

"I don't reckon he did. I don't know."

"Aha! Talk about trying to cure warts with spunk-water such a blame
fool way as that! Why, that ain't a-going to do any good. You got to go
all by yourself, to the middle of the woods, where you know there's a
spunk-water stump, and just as it's midnight you back up against the
stump and jam your hand in and say:

  'Barley-corn, barley-corn, injun-meal shorts,
   Spunk-water, spunk-water, swaller these warts,'

and then walk away quick, eleven steps, with your eyes shut, and then
turn around three times and walk home without speaking to anybody.
Because if you speak the charm's busted."

"Well, that sounds like a good way; but that ain't the way Bob Tanner
done."

"No, sir, you can bet he didn't, becuz he's the wartiest boy in this
town; and he wouldn't have a wart on him if he'd knowed how to work
spunk-water. I've took off thousands of warts off of my hands that way,
Huck. I play with frogs so much that I've always got considerable many
warts. Sometimes I take 'em off with a bean."

"Yes, bean's good. I've done that."

"Have you? What's your way?"

"You take and split the bean, and cut the wart so as to get some
blood, and then you put the blood on one piece of the bean and take and
dig a hole and bury it 'bout midnight at the crossroads in the dark of
the moon, and then you burn up the rest of the bean. You see that piece
that's got the blood on it will keep drawing and drawing, trying to
fetch the other piece to it, and so that helps the blood to draw the
wart, and pretty soon off she comes."

"Yes, that's it, Huck--that's it; though when you're burying it if you
say 'Down bean; off wart; come no more to bother me!' it's better.
That's the way Joe Harper does, and he's been nearly to Coonville and
most everywheres. But say--how do you cure 'em with dead cats?"

"Why, you take your cat and go and get in the graveyard 'long about
midnight when somebody that was wicked has been buried; and when it's
midnight a devil will come, or maybe two or three, but you can't see
'em, you can only hear something like the wind, or maybe hear 'em talk;
and when they're taking that feller away, you heave your cat after 'em
and say, 'Devil follow corpse, cat follow devil, warts follow cat, I'm
done with ye!' That'll fetch ANY wart."

"Sounds right. D'you ever try it, Huck?"

"No, but old Mother Hopkins told me."

"Well, I reckon it's so, then. Becuz they say she's a witch."

"Say! Why, Tom, I KNOW she is. She witched pap. Pap says so his own
self. He come along one day, and he see she was a-witching him, so he
took up a rock, and if she hadn't dodged, he'd a got her. Well, that
very night he rolled off'n a shed wher' he was a layin drunk, and broke
his arm."

"Why, that's awful. How did he know she was a-witching him?"

"Lord, pap can tell, easy. Pap says when they keep looking at you
right stiddy, they're a-witching you. Specially if they mumble. Becuz
when they mumble they're saying the Lord's Prayer backards."

"Say, Hucky, when you going to try the cat?"

"To-night. I reckon they'll come after old Hoss Williams to-night."

"But they buried him Saturday. Didn't they get him Saturday night?"

"Why, how you talk! How could their charms work till midnight?--and
THEN it's Sunday. Devils don't slosh around much of a Sunday, I don't
reckon."

"I never thought of that. That's so. Lemme go with you?"

"Of course--if you ain't afeard."

"Afeard! 'Tain't likely. Will you meow?"

"Yes--and you meow back, if you get a chance. Last time, you kep' me
a-meowing around till old Hays went to throwing rocks at me and says
'Dern that cat!' and so I hove a brick through his window--but don't
you tell."

"I won't. I couldn't meow that night, becuz auntie was watching me,
but I'll meow this time. Say--what's that?"

"Nothing but a tick."

"Where'd you get him?"

"Out in the woods."

"What'll you take for him?"

"I don't know. I don't want to sell him."

"All right. It's a mighty small tick, anyway."

"Oh, anybody can run a tick down that don't belong to them. I'm
satisfied with it. It's a good enough tick for me."

"Sho, there's ticks a plenty. I could have a thousand of 'em if I
wanted to."

"Well, why don't you? Becuz you know mighty well you can't. This is a
pretty early tick, I reckon. It's the first one I've seen this year."

"Say, Huck--I'll give you my tooth for him."

"Less see it."

Tom got out a bit of paper and carefully unrolled it. Huckleberry
viewed it wistfully. The temptation was very strong. At last he said:

"Is it genuwyne?"

Tom lifted his lip and showed the vacancy.

"Well, all right," said Huckleberry, "it's a trade."

Tom enclosed the tick in the percussion-cap box that had lately been
the pinchbug's prison, and the boys separated, each feeling wealthier
than before.

When Tom reached the little isolated frame schoolhouse, he strode in
briskly, with the manner of one who had come with all honest speed.
He hung his hat on a peg and flung himself into his seat with
business-like alacrity. The master, throned on high in his great
splint-bottom arm-chair, was dozing, lulled by the drowsy hum of study.
The interruption roused him.

"Thomas Sawyer!"

Tom knew that when his name was pronounced in full, it meant trouble.

"Sir!"

"Come up here. Now, sir, why are you late again, as usual?"

Tom was about to take refuge in a lie, when he saw two long tails of
yellow hair hanging down a back that he recognized by the electric
sympathy of love; and by that form was THE ONLY VACANT PLACE on the
girls' side of the schoolhouse. He instantly said:

"I STOPPED TO TALK WITH HUCKLEBERRY FINN!"

The master's pulse stood still, and he stared helplessly. The buzz of
study ceased. The pupils wondered if this foolhardy boy had lost his
mind. The master said:

"You--you did what?"

"Stopped to talk with Huckleberry Finn."

There was no mistaking the words.

"Thomas Sawyer, this is the most astounding confession I have ever
listened to. No mere ferule will answer for this offence. Take off your
jacket."

The master's arm performed until it was tired and the stock of
switches notably diminished. Then the order followed:

"Now, sir, go and sit with the girls! And let this be a warning to you."

The titter that rippled around the room appeared to abash the boy, but
in reality that result was caused rather more by his worshipful awe of
his unknown idol and the dread pleasure that lay in his high good
fortune. He sat down upon the end of the pine bench and the girl
hitched herself away from him with a toss of her head. Nudges and winks
and whispers traversed the room, but Tom sat still, with his arms upon
the long, low desk before him, and seemed to study his book.

By and by attention ceased from him, and the accustomed school murmur
rose upon the dull air once more. Presently the boy began to steal
furtive glances at the girl. She observed it, "made a mouth" at him and
gave him the back of her head for the space of a minute. When she
cautiously faced around again, a peach lay before her. She thrust it
away. Tom gently put it back. She thrust it away again, but with less
animosity. Tom patiently returned it to its place. Then she let it
remain. Tom scrawled on his slate, "Please take it--I got more." The
girl glanced at the words, but made no sign. Now the boy began to draw
something on the slate, hiding his work with his left hand. For a time
the girl refused to notice; but her human curiosity presently began to
manifest itself by hardly perceptible signs. The boy worked on,
apparently unconscious. The girl made a sort of noncommittal attempt to
see, but the boy did not betray that he was aware of it. At last she
gave in and hesitatingly whispered:

"Let me see it."

Tom partly uncovered a dismal caricature of a house with two gable
ends to it and a corkscrew of smoke issuing from the chimney. Then the
girl's interest began to fasten itself upon the work and she forgot
everything else. When it was finished, she gazed a moment, then
whispered:

"It's nice--make a man."

The artist erected a man in the front yard, that resembled a derrick.
He could have stepped over the house; but the girl was not
hypercritical; she was satisfied with the monster, and whispered:

"It's a beautiful man--now make me coming along."

Tom drew an hour-glass with a full moon and straw limbs to it and
armed the spreading fingers with a portentous fan. The girl said:

"It's ever so nice--I wish I could draw."

"It's easy," whispered Tom, "I'll learn you."

"Oh, will you? When?"

"At noon. Do you go home to dinner?"

"I'll stay if you will."

"Good--that's a whack. What's your name?"

"Becky Thatcher. What's yours? Oh, I know. It's Thomas Sawyer."

"That's the name they lick me by. I'm Tom when I'm good. You call me
Tom, will you?"

"Yes."

Now Tom began to scrawl something on the slate, hiding the words from
the girl. But she was not backward this time. She begged to see. Tom
said:

"Oh, it ain't anything."

"Yes it is."

"No it ain't. You don't want to see."

"Yes I do, indeed I do. Please let me."

"You'll tell."

"No I won't--deed and deed and double deed won't."

"You won't tell anybody at all? Ever, as long as you live?"

"No, I won't ever tell ANYbody. Now let me."

"Oh, YOU don't want to see!"

"Now that you treat me so, I WILL see." And she put her small hand
upon his and a little scuffle ensued, Tom pretending to resist in
earnest but letting his hand slip by degrees till these words were
revealed: "I LOVE YOU."

"Oh, you bad thing!" And she hit his hand a smart rap, but reddened
and looked pleased, nevertheless.

Just at this juncture the boy felt a slow, fateful grip closing on his
ear, and a steady lifting impulse. In that vise he was borne across the
house and deposited in his own seat, under a peppering fire of giggles
from the whole school. Then the master stood over him during a few
awful moments, and finally moved away to his throne without saying a
word. But although Tom's ear tingled, his heart was jubilant.

As the school quieted down Tom made an honest effort to study, but the
turmoil within him was too great. In turn he took his place in the
reading class and made a botch of it; then in the geography class and
turned lakes into mountains, mountains into rivers, and rivers into
continents, till chaos was come again; then in the spelling class, and
got "turned down," by a succession of mere baby words, till he brought
up at the foot and yielded up the pewter medal which he had worn with
ostentation for months.



CHAPTER VII

THE harder Tom tried to fasten his mind on his book, the more his
ideas wandered. So at last, with a sigh and a yawn, he gave it up. It
seemed to him that the noon recess would never come. The air was
utterly dead. There was not a breath stirring. It was the sleepiest of
sleepy days. The drowsing murmur of the five and twenty studying
scholars soothed the soul like the spell that is in the murmur of bees.
Away off in the flaming sunshine, Cardiff Hill lifted its soft green
sides through a shimmering veil of heat, tinted with the purple of
distance; a few birds floated on lazy wing high in the air; no other
living thing was visible but some cows, and they were asleep. Tom's
heart ached to be free, or else to have something of interest to do to
pass the dreary time. His hand wandered into his pocket and his face
lit up with a glow of gratitude that was prayer, though he did not know
it. Then furtively the percussion-cap box came out. He released the
tick and put him on the long flat desk. The creature probably glowed
with a gratitude that amounted to prayer, too, at this moment, but it
was premature: for when he started thankfully to travel off, Tom turned
him aside with a pin and made him take a new direction.

Tom's bosom friend sat next him, suffering just as Tom had been, and
now he was deeply and gratefully interested in this entertainment in an
instant. This bosom friend was Joe Harper. The two boys were sworn
friends all the week, and embattled enemies on Saturdays. Joe took a
pin out of his lapel and began to assist in exercising the prisoner.
The sport grew in interest momently. Soon Tom said that they were
interfering with each other, and neither getting the fullest benefit of
the tick. So he put Joe's slate on the desk and drew a line down the
middle of it from top to bottom.

"Now," said he, "as long as he is on your side you can stir him up and
I'll let him alone; but if you let him get away and get on my side,
you're to leave him alone as long as I can keep him from crossing over."

"All right, go ahead; start him up."

The tick escaped from Tom, presently, and crossed the equator. Joe
harassed him awhile, and then he got away and crossed back again. This
change of base occurred often. While one boy was worrying the tick with
absorbing interest, the other would look on with interest as strong,
the two heads bowed together over the slate, and the two souls dead to
all things else. At last luck seemed to settle and abide with Joe. The
tick tried this, that, and the other course, and got as excited and as
anxious as the boys themselves, but time and again just as he would
have victory in his very grasp, so to speak, and Tom's fingers would be
twitching to begin, Joe's pin would deftly head him off, and keep
possession. At last Tom could stand it no longer. The temptation was
too strong. So he reached out and lent a hand with his pin. Joe was
angry in a moment. Said he:

"Tom, you let him alone."

"I only just want to stir him up a little, Joe."

"No, sir, it ain't fair; you just let him alone."

"Blame it, I ain't going to stir him much."

"Let him alone, I tell you."

"I won't!"

"You shall--he's on my side of the line."

"Look here, Joe Harper, whose is that tick?"

"I don't care whose tick he is--he's on my side of the line, and you
sha'n't touch him."

"Well, I'll just bet I will, though. He's my tick and I'll do what I
blame please with him, or die!"

A tremendous whack came down on Tom's shoulders, and its duplicate on
Joe's; and for the space of two minutes the dust continued to fly from
the two jackets and the whole school to enjoy it. The boys had been too
absorbed to notice the hush that had stolen upon the school awhile
before when the master came tiptoeing down the room and stood over
them. He had contemplated a good part of the performance before he
contributed his bit of variety to it.

When school broke up at noon, Tom flew to Becky Thatcher, and
whispered in her ear:

"Put on your bonnet and let on you're going home; and when you get to
the corner, give the rest of 'em the slip, and turn down through the
lane and come back. I'll go the other way and come it over 'em the same
way."

So the one went off with one group of scholars, and the other with
another. In a little while the two met at the bottom of the lane, and
when they reached the school they had it all to themselves. Then they
sat together, with a slate before them, and Tom gave Becky the pencil
and held her hand in his, guiding it, and so created another surprising
house. When the interest in art began to wane, the two fell to talking.
Tom was swimming in bliss. He said:

"Do you love rats?"

"No! I hate them!"

"Well, I do, too--LIVE ones. But I mean dead ones, to swing round your
head with a string."

"No, I don't care for rats much, anyway. What I like is chewing-gum."

"Oh, I should say so! I wish I had some now."

"Do you? I've got some. I'll let you chew it awhile, but you must give
it back to me."

That was agreeable, so they chewed it turn about, and dangled their
legs against the bench in excess of contentment.

"Was you ever at a circus?" said Tom.

"Yes, and my pa's going to take me again some time, if I'm good."

"I been to the circus three or four times--lots of times. Church ain't
shucks to a circus. There's things going on at a circus all the time.
I'm going to be a clown in a circus when I grow up."

"Oh, are you! That will be nice. They're so lovely, all spotted up."

"Yes, that's so. And they get slathers of money--most a dollar a day,
Ben Rogers says. Say, Becky, was you ever engaged?"

"What's that?"

"Why, engaged to be married."

"No."

"Would you like to?"

"I reckon so. I don't know. What is it like?"

"Like? Why it ain't like anything. You only just tell a boy you won't
ever have anybody but him, ever ever ever, and then you kiss and that's
all. Anybody can do it."

"Kiss? What do you kiss for?"

"Why, that, you know, is to--well, they always do that."

"Everybody?"

"Why, yes, everybody that's in love with each other. Do you remember
what I wrote on the slate?"

"Ye--yes."

"What was it?"

"I sha'n't tell you."

"Shall I tell YOU?"

"Ye--yes--but some other time."

"No, now."

"No, not now--to-morrow."

"Oh, no, NOW. Please, Becky--I'll whisper it, I'll whisper it ever so
easy."

Becky hesitating, Tom took silence for consent, and passed his arm
about her waist and whispered the tale ever so softly, with his mouth
close to her ear. And then he added:

"Now you whisper it to me--just the same."

She resisted, for a while, and then said:

"You turn your face away so you can't see, and then I will. But you
mustn't ever tell anybody--WILL you, Tom? Now you won't, WILL you?"

"No, indeed, indeed I won't. Now, Becky."

He turned his face away. She bent timidly around till her breath
stirred his curls and whispered, "I--love--you!"

Then she sprang away and ran around and around the desks and benches,
with Tom after her, and took refuge in a corner at last, with her
little white apron to her face. Tom clasped her about her neck and
pleaded:

"Now, Becky, it's all done--all over but the kiss. Don't you be afraid
of that--it ain't anything at all. Please, Becky." And he tugged at her
apron and the hands.

By and by she gave up, and let her hands drop; her face, all glowing
with the struggle, came up and submitted. Tom kissed the red lips and
said:

"Now it's all done, Becky. And always after this, you know, you ain't
ever to love anybody but me, and you ain't ever to marry anybody but
me, ever never and forever. Will you?"

"No, I'll never love anybody but you, Tom, and I'll never marry
anybody but you--and you ain't to ever marry anybody but me, either."

"Certainly. Of course. That's PART of it. And always coming to school
or when we're going home, you're to walk with me, when there ain't
anybody looking--and you choose me and I choose you at parties, because
that's the way you do when you're engaged."

"It's so nice. I never heard of it before."

"Oh, it's ever so gay! Why, me and Amy Lawrence--"

The big eyes told Tom his blunder and he stopped, confused.

"Oh, Tom! Then I ain't the first you've ever been engaged to!"

The child began to cry. Tom said:

"Oh, don't cry, Becky, I don't care for her any more."

"Yes, you do, Tom--you know you do."

Tom tried to put his arm about her neck, but she pushed him away and
turned her face to the wall, and went on crying. Tom tried again, with
soothing words in his mouth, and was repulsed again. Then his pride was
up, and he strode away and went outside. He stood about, restless and
uneasy, for a while, glancing at the door, every now and then, hoping
she would repent and come to find him. But she did not. Then he began
to feel badly and fear that he was in the wrong. It was a hard struggle
with him to make new advances, now, but he nerved himself to it and
entered. She was still standing back there in the corner, sobbing, with
her face to the wall. Tom's heart smote him. He went to her and stood a
moment, not knowing exactly how to proceed. Then he said hesitatingly:

"Becky, I--I don't care for anybody but you."

No reply--but sobs.

"Becky"--pleadingly. "Becky, won't you say something?"

More sobs.

Tom got out his chiefest jewel, a brass knob from the top of an
andiron, and passed it around her so that she could see it, and said:

"Please, Becky, won't you take it?"

She struck it to the floor. Then Tom marched out of the house and over
the hills and far away, to return to school no more that day. Presently
Becky began to suspect. She ran to the door; he was not in sight; she
flew around to the play-yard; he was not there. Then she called:

"Tom! Come back, Tom!"

She listened intently, but there was no answer. She had no companions
but silence and loneliness. So she sat down to cry again and upbraid
herself; and by this time the scholars began to gather again, and she
had to hide her griefs and still her broken heart and take up the cross
of a long, dreary, aching afternoon, with none among the strangers
about her to exchange sorrows with.



CHAPTER VIII

TOM dodged hither and thither through lanes until he was well out of
the track of returning scholars, and then fell into a moody jog. He
crossed a small "branch" two or three times, because of a prevailing
juvenile superstition that to cross water baffled pursuit. Half an hour
later he was disappearing behind the Douglas mansion on the summit of
Cardiff Hill, and the schoolhouse was hardly distinguishable away off
in the valley behind him. He entered a dense wood, picked his pathless
way to the centre of it, and sat down on a mossy spot under a spreading
oak. There was not even a zephyr stirring; the dead noonday heat had
even stilled the songs of the birds; nature lay in a trance that was
broken by no sound but the occasional far-off hammering of a
woodpecker, and this seemed to render the pervading silence and sense
of loneliness the more profound. The boy's soul was steeped in
melancholy; his feelings were in happy accord with his surroundings. He
sat long with his elbows on his knees and his chin in his hands,
meditating. It seemed to him that life was but a trouble, at best, and
he more than half envied Jimmy Hodges, so lately released; it must be
very peaceful, he thought, to lie and slumber and dream forever and
ever, with the wind whispering through the trees and caressing the
grass and the flowers over the grave, and nothing to bother and grieve
about, ever any more. If he only had a clean Sunday-school record he
could be willing to go, and be done with it all. Now as to this girl.
What had he done? Nothing. He had meant the best in the world, and been
treated like a dog--like a very dog. She would be sorry some day--maybe
when it was too late. Ah, if he could only die TEMPORARILY!

But the elastic heart of youth cannot be compressed into one
constrained shape long at a time. Tom presently began to drift
insensibly back into the concerns of this life again. What if he turned
his back, now, and disappeared mysteriously? What if he went away--ever
so far away, into unknown countries beyond the seas--and never came
back any more! How would she feel then! The idea of being a clown
recurred to him now, only to fill him with disgust. For frivolity and
jokes and spotted tights were an offense, when they intruded themselves
upon a spirit that was exalted into the vague august realm of the
romantic. No, he would be a soldier, and return after long years, all
war-worn and illustrious. No--better still, he would join the Indians,
and hunt buffaloes and go on the warpath in the mountain ranges and the
trackless great plains of the Far West, and away in the future come
back a great chief, bristling with feathers, hideous with paint, and
prance into Sunday-school, some drowsy summer morning, with a
bloodcurdling war-whoop, and sear the eyeballs of all his companions
with unappeasable envy. But no, there was something gaudier even than
this. He would be a pirate! That was it! NOW his future lay plain
before him, and glowing with unimaginable splendor. How his name would
fill the world, and make people shudder! How gloriously he would go
plowing the dancing seas, in his long, low, black-hulled racer, the
Spirit of the Storm, with his grisly flag flying at the fore! And at
the zenith of his fame, how he would suddenly appear at the old village
and stalk into church, brown and weather-beaten, in his black velvet
doublet and trunks, his great jack-boots, his crimson sash, his belt
bristling with horse-pistols, his crime-rusted cutlass at his side, his
slouch hat with waving plumes, his black flag unfurled, with the skull
and crossbones on it, and hear with swelling ecstasy the whisperings,
"It's Tom Sawyer the Pirate!--the Black Avenger of the Spanish Main!"

Yes, it was settled; his career was determined. He would run away from
home and enter upon it. He would start the very next morning. Therefore
he must now begin to get ready. He would collect his resources
together. He went to a rotten log near at hand and began to dig under
one end of it with his Barlow knife. He soon struck wood that sounded
hollow. He put his hand there and uttered this incantation impressively:

"What hasn't come here, come! What's here, stay here!"

Then he scraped away the dirt, and exposed a pine shingle. He took it
up and disclosed a shapely little treasure-house whose bottom and sides
were of shingles. In it lay a marble. Tom's astonishment was boundless!
He scratched his head with a perplexed air, and said:

"Well, that beats anything!"

Then he tossed the marble away pettishly, and stood cogitating. The
truth was, that a superstition of his had failed, here, which he and
all his comrades had always looked upon as infallible. If you buried a
marble with certain necessary incantations, and left it alone a
fortnight, and then opened the place with the incantation he had just
used, you would find that all the marbles you had ever lost had
gathered themselves together there, meantime, no matter how widely they
had been separated. But now, this thing had actually and unquestionably
failed. Tom's whole structure of faith was shaken to its foundations.
He had many a time heard of this thing succeeding but never of its
failing before. It did not occur to him that he had tried it several
times before, himself, but could never find the hiding-places
afterward. He puzzled over the matter some time, and finally decided
that some witch had interfered and broken the charm. He thought he
would satisfy himself on that point; so he searched around till he
found a small sandy spot with a little funnel-shaped depression in it.
He laid himself down and put his mouth close to this depression and
called--

"Doodle-bug, doodle-bug, tell me what I want to know! Doodle-bug,
doodle-bug, tell me what I want to know!"

The sand began to work, and presently a small black bug appeared for a
second and then darted under again in a fright.

"He dasn't tell! So it WAS a witch that done it. I just knowed it."

He well knew the futility of trying to contend against witches, so he
gave up discouraged. But it occurred to him that he might as well have
the marble he had just thrown away, and therefore he went and made a
patient search for it. But he could not find it. Now he went back to
his treasure-house and carefully placed himself just as he had been
standing when he tossed the marble away; then he took another marble
from his pocket and tossed it in the same way, saying:

"Brother, go find your brother!"

He watched where it stopped, and went there and looked. But it must
have fallen short or gone too far; so he tried twice more. The last
repetition was successful. The two marbles lay within a foot of each
other.

Just here the blast of a toy tin trumpet came faintly down the green
aisles of the forest. Tom flung off his jacket and trousers, turned a
suspender into a belt, raked away some brush behind the rotten log,
disclosing a rude bow and arrow, a lath sword and a tin trumpet, and in
a moment had seized these things and bounded away, barelegged, with
fluttering shirt. He presently halted under a great elm, blew an
answering blast, and then began to tiptoe and look warily out, this way
and that. He said cautiously--to an imaginary company:

"Hold, my merry men! Keep hid till I blow."

Now appeared Joe Harper, as airily clad and elaborately armed as Tom.
Tom called:

"Hold! Who comes here into Sherwood Forest without my pass?"

"Guy of Guisborne wants no man's pass. Who art thou that--that--"

"Dares to hold such language," said Tom, prompting--for they talked
"by the book," from memory.

"Who art thou that dares to hold such language?"

"I, indeed! I am Robin Hood, as thy caitiff carcase soon shall know."

"Then art thou indeed that famous outlaw? Right gladly will I dispute
with thee the passes of the merry wood. Have at thee!"

They took their lath swords, dumped their other traps on the ground,
struck a fencing attitude, foot to foot, and began a grave, careful
combat, "two up and two down." Presently Tom said:

"Now, if you've got the hang, go it lively!"

So they "went it lively," panting and perspiring with the work. By and
by Tom shouted:

"Fall! fall! Why don't you fall?"

"I sha'n't! Why don't you fall yourself? You're getting the worst of
it."

"Why, that ain't anything. I can't fall; that ain't the way it is in
the book. The book says, 'Then with one back-handed stroke he slew poor
Guy of Guisborne.' You're to turn around and let me hit you in the
back."

There was no getting around the authorities, so Joe turned, received
the whack and fell.

"Now," said Joe, getting up, "you got to let me kill YOU. That's fair."

"Why, I can't do that, it ain't in the book."

"Well, it's blamed mean--that's all."

"Well, say, Joe, you can be Friar Tuck or Much the miller's son, and
lam me with a quarter-staff; or I'll be the Sheriff of Nottingham and
you be Robin Hood a little while and kill me."

This was satisfactory, and so these adventures were carried out. Then
Tom became Robin Hood again, and was allowed by the treacherous nun to
bleed his strength away through his neglected wound. And at last Joe,
representing a whole tribe of weeping outlaws, dragged him sadly forth,
gave his bow into his feeble hands, and Tom said, "Where this arrow
falls, there bury poor Robin Hood under the greenwood tree." Then he
shot the arrow and fell back and would have died, but he lit on a
nettle and sprang up too gaily for a corpse.

The boys dressed themselves, hid their accoutrements, and went off
grieving that there were no outlaws any more, and wondering what modern
civilization could claim to have done to compensate for their loss.
They said they would rather be outlaws a year in Sherwood Forest than
President of the United States forever.



CHAPTER IX

AT half-past nine, that night, Tom and Sid were sent to bed, as usual.
They said their prayers, and Sid was soon asleep. Tom lay awake and
waited, in restless impatience. When it seemed to him that it must be
nearly daylight, he heard the clock strike ten! This was despair. He
would have tossed and fidgeted, as his nerves demanded, but he was
afraid he might wake Sid. So he lay still, and stared up into the dark.
Everything was dismally still. By and by, out of the stillness, little,
scarcely perceptible noises began to emphasize themselves. The ticking
of the clock began to bring itself into notice. Old beams began to
crack mysteriously. The stairs creaked faintly. Evidently spirits were
abroad. A measured, muffled snore issued from Aunt Polly's chamber. And
now the tiresome chirping of a cricket that no human ingenuity could
locate, began. Next the ghastly ticking of a deathwatch in the wall at
the bed's head made Tom shudder--it meant that somebody's days were
numbered. Then the howl of a far-off dog rose on the night air, and was
answered by a fainter howl from a remoter distance. Tom was in an
agony. At last he was satisfied that time had ceased and eternity
begun; he began to doze, in spite of himself; the clock chimed eleven,
but he did not hear it. And then there came, mingling with his
half-formed dreams, a most melancholy caterwauling. The raising of a
neighboring window disturbed him. A cry of "Scat! you devil!" and the
crash of an empty bottle against the back of his aunt's woodshed
brought him wide awake, and a single minute later he was dressed and
out of the window and creeping along the roof of the "ell" on all
fours. He "meow'd" with caution once or twice, as he went; then jumped
to the roof of the woodshed and thence to the ground. Huckleberry Finn
was there, with his dead cat. The boys moved off and disappeared in the
gloom. At the end of half an hour they were wading through the tall
grass of the graveyard.

It was a graveyard of the old-fashioned Western kind. It was on a
hill, about a mile and a half from the village. It had a crazy board
fence around it, which leaned inward in places, and outward the rest of
the time, but stood upright nowhere. Grass and weeds grew rank over the
whole cemetery. All the old graves were sunken in, there was not a
tombstone on the place; round-topped, worm-eaten boards staggered over
the graves, leaning for support and finding none. "Sacred to the memory
of" So-and-So had been painted on them once, but it could no longer
have been read, on the most of them, now, even if there had been light.

A faint wind moaned through the trees, and Tom feared it might be the
spirits of the dead, complaining at being disturbed. The boys talked
little, and only under their breath, for the time and the place and the
pervading solemnity and silence oppressed their spirits. They found the
sharp new heap they were seeking, and ensconced themselves within the
protection of three great elms that grew in a bunch within a few feet
of the grave.

Then they waited in silence for what seemed a long time. The hooting
of a distant owl was all the sound that troubled the dead stillness.
Tom's reflections grew oppressive. He must force some talk. So he said
in a whisper:

"Hucky, do you believe the dead people like it for us to be here?"

Huckleberry whispered:

"I wisht I knowed. It's awful solemn like, AIN'T it?"

"I bet it is."

There was a considerable pause, while the boys canvassed this matter
inwardly. Then Tom whispered:

"Say, Hucky--do you reckon Hoss Williams hears us talking?"

"O' course he does. Least his sperrit does."

Tom, after a pause:

"I wish I'd said Mister Williams. But I never meant any harm.
Everybody calls him Hoss."

"A body can't be too partic'lar how they talk 'bout these-yer dead
people, Tom."

This was a damper, and conversation died again.

Presently Tom seized his comrade's arm and said:

"Sh!"

"What is it, Tom?" And the two clung together with beating hearts.

"Sh! There 'tis again! Didn't you hear it?"

"I--"

"There! Now you hear it."

"Lord, Tom, they're coming! They're coming, sure. What'll we do?"

"I dono. Think they'll see us?"

"Oh, Tom, they can see in the dark, same as cats. I wisht I hadn't
come."

"Oh, don't be afeard. I don't believe they'll bother us. We ain't
doing any harm. If we keep perfectly still, maybe they won't notice us
at all."

"I'll try to, Tom, but, Lord, I'm all of a shiver."

"Listen!"

The boys bent their heads together and scarcely breathed. A muffled
sound of voices floated up from the far end of the graveyard.

"Look! See there!" whispered Tom. "What is it?"

"It's devil-fire. Oh, Tom, this is awful."

Some vague figures approached through the gloom, swinging an
old-fashioned tin lantern that freckled the ground with innumerable
little spangles of light. Presently Huckleberry whispered with a
shudder:

"It's the devils sure enough. Three of 'em! Lordy, Tom, we're goners!
Can you pray?"

"I'll try, but don't you be afeard. They ain't going to hurt us. 'Now
I lay me down to sleep, I--'"

"Sh!"

"What is it, Huck?"

"They're HUMANS! One of 'em is, anyway. One of 'em's old Muff Potter's
voice."

"No--'tain't so, is it?"

"I bet I know it. Don't you stir nor budge. He ain't sharp enough to
notice us. Drunk, the same as usual, likely--blamed old rip!"

"All right, I'll keep still. Now they're stuck. Can't find it. Here
they come again. Now they're hot. Cold again. Hot again. Red hot!
They're p'inted right, this time. Say, Huck, I know another o' them
voices; it's Injun Joe."

"That's so--that murderin' half-breed! I'd druther they was devils a
dern sight. What kin they be up to?"

The whisper died wholly out, now, for the three men had reached the
grave and stood within a few feet of the boys' hiding-place.

"Here it is," said the third voice; and the owner of it held the
lantern up and revealed the face of young Doctor Robinson.

Potter and Injun Joe were carrying a handbarrow with a rope and a
couple of shovels on it. They cast down their load and began to open
the grave. The doctor put the lantern at the head of the grave and came
and sat down with his back against one of the elm trees. He was so
close the boys could have touched him.

"Hurry, men!" he said, in a low voice; "the moon might come out at any
moment."

They growled a response and went on digging. For some time there was
no noise but the grating sound of the spades discharging their freight
of mould and gravel. It was very monotonous. Finally a spade struck
upon the coffin with a dull woody accent, and within another minute or
two the men had hoisted it out on the ground. They pried off the lid
with their shovels, got out the body and dumped it rudely on the
ground. The moon drifted from behind the clouds and exposed the pallid
face. The barrow was got ready and the corpse placed on it, covered
with a blanket, and bound to its place with the rope. Potter took out a
large spring-knife and cut off the dangling end of the rope and then
said:

"Now the cussed thing's ready, Sawbones, and you'll just out with
another five, or here she stays."

"That's the talk!" said Injun Joe.

"Look here, what does this mean?" said the doctor. "You required your
pay in advance, and I've paid you."

"Yes, and you done more than that," said Injun Joe, approaching the
doctor, who was now standing. "Five years ago you drove me away from
your father's kitchen one night, when I come to ask for something to
eat, and you said I warn't there for any good; and when I swore I'd get
even with you if it took a hundred years, your father had me jailed for
a vagrant. Did you think I'd forget? The Injun blood ain't in me for
nothing. And now I've GOT you, and you got to SETTLE, you know!"

He was threatening the doctor, with his fist in his face, by this
time. The doctor struck out suddenly and stretched the ruffian on the
ground. Potter dropped his knife, and exclaimed:

"Here, now, don't you hit my pard!" and the next moment he had
grappled with the doctor and the two were struggling with might and
main, trampling the grass and tearing the ground with their heels.
Injun Joe sprang to his feet, his eyes flaming with passion, snatched
up Potter's knife, and went creeping, catlike and stooping, round and
round about the combatants, seeking an opportunity. All at once the
doctor flung himself free, seized the heavy headboard of Williams'
grave and felled Potter to the earth with it--and in the same instant
the half-breed saw his chance and drove the knife to the hilt in the
young man's breast. He reeled and fell partly upon Potter, flooding him
with his blood, and in the same moment the clouds blotted out the
dreadful spectacle and the two frightened boys went speeding away in
the dark.

Presently, when the moon emerged again, Injun Joe was standing over
the two forms, contemplating them. The doctor murmured inarticulately,
gave a long gasp or two and was still. The half-breed muttered:

"THAT score is settled--damn you."

Then he robbed the body. After which he put the fatal knife in
Potter's open right hand, and sat down on the dismantled coffin. Three
--four--five minutes passed, and then Potter began to stir and moan. His
hand closed upon the knife; he raised it, glanced at it, and let it
fall, with a shudder. Then he sat up, pushing the body from him, and
gazed at it, and then around him, confusedly. His eyes met Joe's.

"Lord, how is this, Joe?" he said.

"It's a dirty business," said Joe, without moving.

"What did you do it for?"

"I! I never done it!"

"Look here! That kind of talk won't wash."

Potter trembled and grew white.

"I thought I'd got sober. I'd no business to drink to-night. But it's
in my head yet--worse'n when we started here. I'm all in a muddle;
can't recollect anything of it, hardly. Tell me, Joe--HONEST, now, old
feller--did I do it? Joe, I never meant to--'pon my soul and honor, I
never meant to, Joe. Tell me how it was, Joe. Oh, it's awful--and him
so young and promising."

"Why, you two was scuffling, and he fetched you one with the headboard
and you fell flat; and then up you come, all reeling and staggering
like, and snatched the knife and jammed it into him, just as he fetched
you another awful clip--and here you've laid, as dead as a wedge til
now."

"Oh, I didn't know what I was a-doing. I wish I may die this minute if
I did. It was all on account of the whiskey and the excitement, I
reckon. I never used a weepon in my life before, Joe. I've fought, but
never with weepons. They'll all say that. Joe, don't tell! Say you
won't tell, Joe--that's a good feller. I always liked you, Joe, and
stood up for you, too. Don't you remember? You WON'T tell, WILL you,
Joe?" And the poor creature dropped on his knees before the stolid
murderer, and clasped his appealing hands.

"No, you've always been fair and square with me, Muff Potter, and I
won't go back on you. There, now, that's as fair as a man can say."

"Oh, Joe, you're an angel. I'll bless you for this the longest day I
live." And Potter began to cry.

"Come, now, that's enough of that. This ain't any time for blubbering.
You be off yonder way and I'll go this. Move, now, and don't leave any
tracks behind you."

Potter started on a trot that quickly increased to a run. The
half-breed stood looking after him. He muttered:

"If he's as much stunned with the lick and fuddled with the rum as he
had the look of being, he won't think of the knife till he's gone so
far he'll be afraid to come back after it to such a place by himself
--chicken-heart!"

Two or three minutes later the murdered man, the blanketed corpse, the
lidless coffin, and the open grave were under no inspection but the
moon's. The stillness was complete again, too.



CHAPTER X

THE two boys flew on and on, toward the village, speechless with
horror. They glanced backward over their shoulders from time to time,
apprehensively, as if they feared they might be followed. Every stump
that started up in their path seemed a man and an enemy, and made them
catch their breath; and as they sped by some outlying cottages that lay
near the village, the barking of the aroused watch-dogs seemed to give
wings to their feet.

"If we can only get to the old tannery before we break down!"
whispered Tom, in short catches between breaths. "I can't stand it much
longer."

Huckleberry's hard pantings were his only reply, and the boys fixed
their eyes on the goal of their hopes and bent to their work to win it.
They gained steadily on it, and at last, breast to breast, they burst
through the open door and fell grateful and exhausted in the sheltering
shadows beyond. By and by their pulses slowed down, and Tom whispered:

"Huckleberry, what do you reckon'll come of this?"

"If Doctor Robinson dies, I reckon hanging'll come of it."

"Do you though?"

"Why, I KNOW it, Tom."

Tom thought a while, then he said:

"Who'll tell? We?"

"What are you talking about? S'pose something happened and Injun Joe
DIDN'T hang? Why, he'd kill us some time or other, just as dead sure as
we're a laying here."

"That's just what I was thinking to myself, Huck."

"If anybody tells, let Muff Potter do it, if he's fool enough. He's
generally drunk enough."

Tom said nothing--went on thinking. Presently he whispered:

"Huck, Muff Potter don't know it. How can he tell?"

"What's the reason he don't know it?"

"Because he'd just got that whack when Injun Joe done it. D'you reckon
he could see anything? D'you reckon he knowed anything?"

"By hokey, that's so, Tom!"

"And besides, look-a-here--maybe that whack done for HIM!"

"No, 'taint likely, Tom. He had liquor in him; I could see that; and
besides, he always has. Well, when pap's full, you might take and belt
him over the head with a church and you couldn't phase him. He says so,
his own self. So it's the same with Muff Potter, of course. But if a
man was dead sober, I reckon maybe that whack might fetch him; I dono."

After another reflective silence, Tom said:

"Hucky, you sure you can keep mum?"

"Tom, we GOT to keep mum. You know that. That Injun devil wouldn't
make any more of drownding us than a couple of cats, if we was to
squeak 'bout this and they didn't hang him. Now, look-a-here, Tom, less
take and swear to one another--that's what we got to do--swear to keep
mum."

"I'm agreed. It's the best thing. Would you just hold hands and swear
that we--"

"Oh no, that wouldn't do for this. That's good enough for little
rubbishy common things--specially with gals, cuz THEY go back on you
anyway, and blab if they get in a huff--but there orter be writing
'bout a big thing like this. And blood."

Tom's whole being applauded this idea. It was deep, and dark, and
awful; the hour, the circumstances, the surroundings, were in keeping
with it. He picked up a clean pine shingle that lay in the moonlight,
took a little fragment of "red keel" out of his pocket, got the moon on
his work, and painfully scrawled these lines, emphasizing each slow
down-stroke by clamping his tongue between his teeth, and letting up
the pressure on the up-strokes. [See next page.]

   "Huck Finn and
    Tom Sawyer swears
    they will keep mum
    about This and They
    wish They may Drop
    down dead in Their
    Tracks if They ever
    Tell and Rot."

Huckleberry was filled with admiration of Tom's facility in writing,
and the sublimity of his language. He at once took a pin from his lapel
and was going to prick his flesh, but Tom said:

"Hold on! Don't do that. A pin's brass. It might have verdigrease on
it."

"What's verdigrease?"

"It's p'ison. That's what it is. You just swaller some of it once
--you'll see."

So Tom unwound the thread from one of his needles, and each boy
pricked the ball of his thumb and squeezed out a drop of blood. In
time, after many squeezes, Tom managed to sign his initials, using the
ball of his little finger for a pen. Then he showed Huckleberry how to
make an H and an F, and the oath was complete. They buried the shingle
close to the wall, with some dismal ceremonies and incantations, and
the fetters that bound their tongues were considered to be locked and
the key thrown away.

A figure crept stealthily through a break in the other end of the
ruined building, now, but they did not notice it.

"Tom," whispered Huckleberry, "does this keep us from EVER telling
--ALWAYS?"

"Of course it does. It don't make any difference WHAT happens, we got
to keep mum. We'd drop down dead--don't YOU know that?"

"Yes, I reckon that's so."

They continued to whisper for some little time. Presently a dog set up
a long, lugubrious howl just outside--within ten feet of them. The boys
clasped each other suddenly, in an agony of fright.

"Which of us does he mean?" gasped Huckleberry.

"I dono--peep through the crack. Quick!"

"No, YOU, Tom!"

"I can't--I can't DO it, Huck!"

"Please, Tom. There 'tis again!"

"Oh, lordy, I'm thankful!" whispered Tom. "I know his voice. It's Bull
Harbison." *

[* If Mr. Harbison owned a slave named Bull, Tom would have spoken of
him as "Harbison's Bull," but a son or a dog of that name was "Bull
Harbison."]

"Oh, that's good--I tell you, Tom, I was most scared to death; I'd a
bet anything it was a STRAY dog."

The dog howled again. The boys' hearts sank once more.

"Oh, my! that ain't no Bull Harbison!" whispered Huckleberry. "DO, Tom!"

Tom, quaking with fear, yielded, and put his eye to the crack. His
whisper was hardly audible when he said:

"Oh, Huck, IT S A STRAY DOG!"

"Quick, Tom, quick! Who does he mean?"

"Huck, he must mean us both--we're right together."

"Oh, Tom, I reckon we're goners. I reckon there ain't no mistake 'bout
where I'LL go to. I been so wicked."

"Dad fetch it! This comes of playing hookey and doing everything a
feller's told NOT to do. I might a been good, like Sid, if I'd a tried
--but no, I wouldn't, of course. But if ever I get off this time, I lay
I'll just WALLER in Sunday-schools!" And Tom began to snuffle a little.

"YOU bad!" and Huckleberry began to snuffle too. "Consound it, Tom
Sawyer, you're just old pie, 'longside o' what I am. Oh, LORDY, lordy,
lordy, I wisht I only had half your chance."

Tom choked off and whispered:

"Look, Hucky, look! He's got his BACK to us!"

Hucky looked, with joy in his heart.

"Well, he has, by jingoes! Did he before?"

"Yes, he did. But I, like a fool, never thought. Oh, this is bully,
you know. NOW who can he mean?"

The howling stopped. Tom pricked up his ears.

"Sh! What's that?" he whispered.

"Sounds like--like hogs grunting. No--it's somebody snoring, Tom."

"That IS it! Where 'bouts is it, Huck?"

"I bleeve it's down at 'tother end. Sounds so, anyway. Pap used to
sleep there, sometimes, 'long with the hogs, but laws bless you, he
just lifts things when HE snores. Besides, I reckon he ain't ever
coming back to this town any more."

The spirit of adventure rose in the boys' souls once more.

"Hucky, do you das't to go if I lead?"

"I don't like to, much. Tom, s'pose it's Injun Joe!"

Tom quailed. But presently the temptation rose up strong again and the
boys agreed to try, with the understanding that they would take to
their heels if the snoring stopped. So they went tiptoeing stealthily
down, the one behind the other. When they had got to within five steps
of the snorer, Tom stepped on a stick, and it broke with a sharp snap.
The man moaned, writhed a little, and his face came into the moonlight.
It was Muff Potter. The boys' hearts had stood still, and their hopes
too, when the man moved, but their fears passed away now. They tiptoed
out, through the broken weather-boarding, and stopped at a little
distance to exchange a parting word. That long, lugubrious howl rose on
the night air again! They turned and saw the strange dog standing
within a few feet of where Potter was lying, and FACING Potter, with
his nose pointing heavenward.

"Oh, geeminy, it's HIM!" exclaimed both boys, in a breath.

"Say, Tom--they say a stray dog come howling around Johnny Miller's
house, 'bout midnight, as much as two weeks ago; and a whippoorwill
come in and lit on the banisters and sung, the very same evening; and
there ain't anybody dead there yet."

"Well, I know that. And suppose there ain't. Didn't Gracie Miller fall
in the kitchen fire and burn herself terrible the very next Saturday?"

"Yes, but she ain't DEAD. And what's more, she's getting better, too."

"All right, you wait and see. She's a goner, just as dead sure as Muff
Potter's a goner. That's what the niggers say, and they know all about
these kind of things, Huck."

Then they separated, cogitating. When Tom crept in at his bedroom
window the night was almost spent. He undressed with excessive caution,
and fell asleep congratulating himself that nobody knew of his
escapade. He was not aware that the gently-snoring Sid was awake, and
had been so for an hour.

When Tom awoke, Sid was dressed and gone. There was a late look in the
light, a late sense in the atmosphere. He was startled. Why had he not
been called--persecuted till he was up, as usual? The thought filled
him with bodings. Within five minutes he was dressed and down-stairs,
feeling sore and drowsy. The family were still at table, but they had
finished breakfast. There was no voice of rebuke; but there were
averted eyes; there was a silence and an air of solemnity that struck a
chill to the culprit's heart. He sat down and tried to seem gay, but it
was up-hill work; it roused no smile, no response, and he lapsed into
silence and let his heart sink down to the depths.

After breakfast his aunt took him aside, and Tom almost brightened in
the hope that he was going to be flogged; but it was not so. His aunt
wept over him and asked him how he could go and break her old heart so;
and finally told him to go on, and ruin himself and bring her gray
hairs with sorrow to the grave, for it was no use for her to try any
more. This was worse than a thousand whippings, and Tom's heart was
sorer now than his body. He cried, he pleaded for forgiveness, promised
to reform over and over again, and then received his dismissal, feeling
that he had won but an imperfect forgiveness and established but a
feeble confidence.

He left the presence too miserable to even feel revengeful toward Sid;
and so the latter's prompt retreat through the back gate was
unnecessary. He moped to school gloomy and sad, and took his flogging,
along with Joe Harper, for playing hookey the day before, with the air
of one whose heart was busy with heavier woes and wholly dead to
trifles. Then he betook himself to his seat, rested his elbows on his
desk and his jaws in his hands, and stared at the wall with the stony
stare of suffering that has reached the limit and can no further go.
His elbow was pressing against some hard substance. After a long time
he slowly and sadly changed his position, and took up this object with
a sigh. It was in a paper. He unrolled it. A long, lingering, colossal
sigh followed, and his heart broke. It was his brass andiron knob!

This final feather broke the camel's back.



CHAPTER XI

CLOSE upon the hour of noon the whole village was suddenly electrified
with the ghastly news. No need of the as yet undreamed-of telegraph;
the tale flew from man to man, from group to group, from house to
house, with little less than telegraphic speed. Of course the
schoolmaster gave holiday for that afternoon; the town would have
thought strangely of him if he had not.

A gory knife had been found close to the murdered man, and it had been
recognized by somebody as belonging to Muff Potter--so the story ran.
And it was said that a belated citizen had come upon Potter washing
himself in the "branch" about one or two o'clock in the morning, and
that Potter had at once sneaked off--suspicious circumstances,
especially the washing which was not a habit with Potter. It was also
said that the town had been ransacked for this "murderer" (the public
are not slow in the matter of sifting evidence and arriving at a
verdict), but that he could not be found. Horsemen had departed down
all the roads in every direction, and the Sheriff "was confident" that
he would be captured before night.

All the town was drifting toward the graveyard. Tom's heartbreak
vanished and he joined the procession, not because he would not a
thousand times rather go anywhere else, but because an awful,
unaccountable fascination drew him on. Arrived at the dreadful place,
he wormed his small body through the crowd and saw the dismal
spectacle. It seemed to him an age since he was there before. Somebody
pinched his arm. He turned, and his eyes met Huckleberry's. Then both
looked elsewhere at once, and wondered if anybody had noticed anything
in their mutual glance. But everybody was talking, and intent upon the
grisly spectacle before them.

"Poor fellow!" "Poor young fellow!" "This ought to be a lesson to
grave robbers!" "Muff Potter'll hang for this if they catch him!" This
was the drift of remark; and the minister said, "It was a judgment; His
hand is here."

Now Tom shivered from head to heel; for his eye fell upon the stolid
face of Injun Joe. At this moment the crowd began to sway and struggle,
and voices shouted, "It's him! it's him! he's coming himself!"

"Who? Who?" from twenty voices.

"Muff Potter!"

"Hallo, he's stopped!--Look out, he's turning! Don't let him get away!"

People in the branches of the trees over Tom's head said he wasn't
trying to get away--he only looked doubtful and perplexed.

"Infernal impudence!" said a bystander; "wanted to come and take a
quiet look at his work, I reckon--didn't expect any company."

The crowd fell apart, now, and the Sheriff came through,
ostentatiously leading Potter by the arm. The poor fellow's face was
haggard, and his eyes showed the fear that was upon him. When he stood
before the murdered man, he shook as with a palsy, and he put his face
in his hands and burst into tears.

"I didn't do it, friends," he sobbed; "'pon my word and honor I never
done it."

"Who's accused you?" shouted a voice.

This shot seemed to carry home. Potter lifted his face and looked
around him with a pathetic hopelessness in his eyes. He saw Injun Joe,
and exclaimed:

"Oh, Injun Joe, you promised me you'd never--"

"Is that your knife?" and it was thrust before him by the Sheriff.

Potter would have fallen if they had not caught him and eased him to
the ground. Then he said:

"Something told me 't if I didn't come back and get--" He shuddered;
then waved his nerveless hand with a vanquished gesture and said, "Tell
'em, Joe, tell 'em--it ain't any use any more."

Then Huckleberry and Tom stood dumb and staring, and heard the
stony-hearted liar reel off his serene statement, they expecting every
moment that the clear sky would deliver God's lightnings upon his head,
and wondering to see how long the stroke was delayed. And when he had
finished and still stood alive and whole, their wavering impulse to
break their oath and save the poor betrayed prisoner's life faded and
vanished away, for plainly this miscreant had sold himself to Satan and
it would be fatal to meddle with the property of such a power as that.

"Why didn't you leave? What did you want to come here for?" somebody
said.

"I couldn't help it--I couldn't help it," Potter moaned. "I wanted to
run away, but I couldn't seem to come anywhere but here." And he fell
to sobbing again.

Injun Joe repeated his statement, just as calmly, a few minutes
afterward on the inquest, under oath; and the boys, seeing that the
lightnings were still withheld, were confirmed in their belief that Joe
had sold himself to the devil. He was now become, to them, the most
balefully interesting object they had ever looked upon, and they could
not take their fascinated eyes from his face.

They inwardly resolved to watch him nights, when opportunity should
offer, in the hope of getting a glimpse of his dread master.

Injun Joe helped to raise the body of the murdered man and put it in a
wagon for removal; and it was whispered through the shuddering crowd
that the wound bled a little! The boys thought that this happy
circumstance would turn suspicion in the right direction; but they were
disappointed, for more than one villager remarked:

"It was within three feet of Muff Potter when it done it."

Tom's fearful secret and gnawing conscience disturbed his sleep for as
much as a week after this; and at breakfast one morning Sid said:

"Tom, you pitch around and talk in your sleep so much that you keep me
awake half the time."

Tom blanched and dropped his eyes.

"It's a bad sign," said Aunt Polly, gravely. "What you got on your
mind, Tom?"

"Nothing. Nothing 't I know of." But the boy's hand shook so that he
spilled his coffee.

"And you do talk such stuff," Sid said. "Last night you said, 'It's
blood, it's blood, that's what it is!' You said that over and over. And
you said, 'Don't torment me so--I'll tell!' Tell WHAT? What is it
you'll tell?"

Everything was swimming before Tom. There is no telling what might
have happened, now, but luckily the concern passed out of Aunt Polly's
face and she came to Tom's relief without knowing it. She said:

"Sho! It's that dreadful murder. I dream about it most every night
myself. Sometimes I dream it's me that done it."

Mary said she had been affected much the same way. Sid seemed
satisfied. Tom got out of the presence as quick as he plausibly could,
and after that he complained of toothache for a week, and tied up his
jaws every night. He never knew that Sid lay nightly watching, and
frequently slipped the bandage free and then leaned on his elbow
listening a good while at a time, and afterward slipped the bandage
back to its place again. Tom's distress of mind wore off gradually and
the toothache grew irksome and was discarded. If Sid really managed to
make anything out of Tom's disjointed mutterings, he kept it to himself.

It seemed to Tom that his schoolmates never would get done holding
inquests on dead cats, and thus keeping his trouble present to his
mind. Sid noticed that Tom never was coroner at one of these inquiries,
though it had been his habit to take the lead in all new enterprises;
he noticed, too, that Tom never acted as a witness--and that was
strange; and Sid did not overlook the fact that Tom even showed a
marked aversion to these inquests, and always avoided them when he
could. Sid marvelled, but said nothing. However, even inquests went out
of vogue at last, and ceased to torture Tom's conscience.

Every day or two, during this time of sorrow, Tom watched his
opportunity and went to the little grated jail-window and smuggled such
small comforts through to the "murderer" as he could get hold of. The
jail was a trifling little brick den that stood in a marsh at the edge
of the village, and no guards were afforded for it; indeed, it was
seldom occupied. These offerings greatly helped to ease Tom's
conscience.

The villagers had a strong desire to tar-and-feather Injun Joe and
ride him on a rail, for body-snatching, but so formidable was his
character that nobody could be found who was willing to take the lead
in the matter, so it was dropped. He had been careful to begin both of
his inquest-statements with the fight, without confessing the
grave-robbery that preceded it; therefore it was deemed wisest not
to try the case in the courts at present.



CHAPTER XII

ONE of the reasons why Tom's mind had drifted away from its secret
troubles was, that it had found a new and weighty matter to interest
itself about. Becky Thatcher had stopped coming to school. Tom had
struggled with his pride a few days, and tried to "whistle her down the
wind," but failed. He began to find himself hanging around her father's
house, nights, and feeling very miserable. She was ill. What if she
should die! There was distraction in the thought. He no longer took an
interest in war, nor even in piracy. The charm of life was gone; there
was nothing but dreariness left. He put his hoop away, and his bat;
there was no joy in them any more. His aunt was concerned. She began to
try all manner of remedies on him. She was one of those people who are
infatuated with patent medicines and all new-fangled methods of
producing health or mending it. She was an inveterate experimenter in
these things. When something fresh in this line came out she was in a
fever, right away, to try it; not on herself, for she was never ailing,
but on anybody else that came handy. She was a subscriber for all the
"Health" periodicals and phrenological frauds; and the solemn ignorance
they were inflated with was breath to her nostrils. All the "rot" they
contained about ventilation, and how to go to bed, and how to get up,
and what to eat, and what to drink, and how much exercise to take, and
what frame of mind to keep one's self in, and what sort of clothing to
wear, was all gospel to her, and she never observed that her
health-journals of the current month customarily upset everything they
had recommended the month before. She was as simple-hearted and honest
as the day was long, and so she was an easy victim. She gathered
together her quack periodicals and her quack medicines, and thus armed
with death, went about on her pale horse, metaphorically speaking, with
"hell following after." But she never suspected that she was not an
angel of healing and the balm of Gilead in disguise, to the suffering
neighbors.

The water treatment was new, now, and Tom's low condition was a
windfall to her. She had him out at daylight every morning, stood him
up in the woodshed and drowned him with a deluge of cold water; then
she scrubbed him down with a towel like a file, and so brought him to;
then she rolled him up in a wet sheet and put him away under blankets
till she sweated his soul clean and "the yellow stains of it came
through his pores"--as Tom said.

Yet notwithstanding all this, the boy grew more and more melancholy
and pale and dejected. She added hot baths, sitz baths, shower baths,
and plunges. The boy remained as dismal as a hearse. She began to
assist the water with a slim oatmeal diet and blister-plasters. She
calculated his capacity as she would a jug's, and filled him up every
day with quack cure-alls.

Tom had become indifferent to persecution by this time. This phase
filled the old lady's heart with consternation. This indifference must
be broken up at any cost. Now she heard of Pain-killer for the first
time. She ordered a lot at once. She tasted it and was filled with
gratitude. It was simply fire in a liquid form. She dropped the water
treatment and everything else, and pinned her faith to Pain-killer. She
gave Tom a teaspoonful and watched with the deepest anxiety for the
result. Her troubles were instantly at rest, her soul at peace again;
for the "indifference" was broken up. The boy could not have shown a
wilder, heartier interest, if she had built a fire under him.

Tom felt that it was time to wake up; this sort of life might be
romantic enough, in his blighted condition, but it was getting to have
too little sentiment and too much distracting variety about it. So he
thought over various plans for relief, and finally hit pon that of
professing to be fond of Pain-killer. He asked for it so often that he
became a nuisance, and his aunt ended by telling him to help himself
and quit bothering her. If it had been Sid, she would have had no
misgivings to alloy her delight; but since it was Tom, she watched the
bottle clandestinely. She found that the medicine did really diminish,
but it did not occur to her that the boy was mending the health of a
crack in the sitting-room floor with it.

One day Tom was in the act of dosing the crack when his aunt's yellow
cat came along, purring, eying the teaspoon avariciously, and begging
for a taste. Tom said:

"Don't ask for it unless you want it, Peter."

But Peter signified that he did want it.

"You better make sure."

Peter was sure.

"Now you've asked for it, and I'll give it to you, because there ain't
anything mean about me; but if you find you don't like it, you mustn't
blame anybody but your own self."

Peter was agreeable. So Tom pried his mouth open and poured down the
Pain-killer. Peter sprang a couple of yards in the air, and then
delivered a war-whoop and set off round and round the room, banging
against furniture, upsetting flower-pots, and making general havoc.
Next he rose on his hind feet and pranced around, in a frenzy of
enjoyment, with his head over his shoulder and his voice proclaiming
his unappeasable happiness. Then he went tearing around the house again
spreading chaos and destruction in his path. Aunt Polly entered in time
to see him throw a few double summersets, deliver a final mighty
hurrah, and sail through the open window, carrying the rest of the
flower-pots with him. The old lady stood petrified with astonishment,
peering over her glasses; Tom lay on the floor expiring with laughter.

"Tom, what on earth ails that cat?"

"I don't know, aunt," gasped the boy.

"Why, I never see anything like it. What did make him act so?"

"Deed I don't know, Aunt Polly; cats always act so when they're having
a good time."

"They do, do they?" There was something in the tone that made Tom
apprehensive.

"Yes'm. That is, I believe they do."

"You DO?"

"Yes'm."

The old lady was bending down, Tom watching, with interest emphasized
by anxiety. Too late he divined her "drift." The handle of the telltale
teaspoon was visible under the bed-valance. Aunt Polly took it, held it
up. Tom winced, and dropped his eyes. Aunt Polly raised him by the
usual handle--his ear--and cracked his head soundly with her thimble.

"Now, sir, what did you want to treat that poor dumb beast so, for?"

"I done it out of pity for him--because he hadn't any aunt."

"Hadn't any aunt!--you numskull. What has that got to do with it?"

"Heaps. Because if he'd had one she'd a burnt him out herself! She'd a
roasted his bowels out of him 'thout any more feeling than if he was a
human!"

Aunt Polly felt a sudden pang of remorse. This was putting the thing
in a new light; what was cruelty to a cat MIGHT be cruelty to a boy,
too. She began to soften; she felt sorry. Her eyes watered a little,
and she put her hand on Tom's head and said gently:

"I was meaning for the best, Tom. And, Tom, it DID do you good."

Tom looked up in her face with just a perceptible twinkle peeping
through his gravity.

"I know you was meaning for the best, aunty, and so was I with Peter.
It done HIM good, too. I never see him get around so since--"

"Oh, go 'long with you, Tom, before you aggravate me again. And you
try and see if you can't be a good boy, for once, and you needn't take
any more medicine."

Tom reached school ahead of time. It was noticed that this strange
thing had been occurring every day latterly. And now, as usual of late,
he hung about the gate of the schoolyard instead of playing with his
comrades. He was sick, he said, and he looked it. He tried to seem to
be looking everywhere but whither he really was looking--down the road.
Presently Jeff Thatcher hove in sight, and Tom's face lighted; he gazed
a moment, and then turned sorrowfully away. When Jeff arrived, Tom
accosted him; and "led up" warily to opportunities for remark about
Becky, but the giddy lad never could see the bait. Tom watched and
watched, hoping whenever a frisking frock came in sight, and hating the
owner of it as soon as he saw she was not the right one. At last frocks
ceased to appear, and he dropped hopelessly into the dumps; he entered
the empty schoolhouse and sat down to suffer. Then one more frock
passed in at the gate, and Tom's heart gave a great bound. The next
instant he was out, and "going on" like an Indian; yelling, laughing,
chasing boys, jumping over the fence at risk of life and limb, throwing
handsprings, standing on his head--doing all the heroic things he could
conceive of, and keeping a furtive eye out, all the while, to see if
Becky Thatcher was noticing. But she seemed to be unconscious of it
all; she never looked. Could it be possible that she was not aware that
he was there? He carried his exploits to her immediate vicinity; came
war-whooping around, snatched a boy's cap, hurled it to the roof of the
schoolhouse, broke through a group of boys, tumbling them in every
direction, and fell sprawling, himself, under Becky's nose, almost
upsetting her--and she turned, with her nose in the air, and he heard
her say: "Mf! some people think they're mighty smart--always showing
off!"

Tom's cheeks burned. He gathered himself up and sneaked off, crushed
and crestfallen.



CHAPTER XIII

TOM'S mind was made up now. He was gloomy and desperate. He was a
forsaken, friendless boy, he said; nobody loved him; when they found
out what they had driven him to, perhaps they would be sorry; he had
tried to do right and get along, but they would not let him; since
nothing would do them but to be rid of him, let it be so; and let them
blame HIM for the consequences--why shouldn't they? What right had the
friendless to complain? Yes, they had forced him to it at last: he
would lead a life of crime. There was no choice.

By this time he was far down Meadow Lane, and the bell for school to
"take up" tinkled faintly upon his ear. He sobbed, now, to think he
should never, never hear that old familiar sound any more--it was very
hard, but it was forced on him; since he was driven out into the cold
world, he must submit--but he forgave them. Then the sobs came thick
and fast.

Just at this point he met his soul's sworn comrade, Joe Harper
--hard-eyed, and with evidently a great and dismal purpose in his heart.
Plainly here were "two souls with but a single thought." Tom, wiping
his eyes with his sleeve, began to blubber out something about a
resolution to escape from hard usage and lack of sympathy at home by
roaming abroad into the great world never to return; and ended by
hoping that Joe would not forget him.

But it transpired that this was a request which Joe had just been
going to make of Tom, and had come to hunt him up for that purpose. His
mother had whipped him for drinking some cream which he had never
tasted and knew nothing about; it was plain that she was tired of him
and wished him to go; if she felt that way, there was nothing for him
to do but succumb; he hoped she would be happy, and never regret having
driven her poor boy out into the unfeeling world to suffer and die.

As the two boys walked sorrowing along, they made a new compact to
stand by each other and be brothers and never separate till death
relieved them of their troubles. Then they began to lay their plans.
Joe was for being a hermit, and living on crusts in a remote cave, and
dying, some time, of cold and want and grief; but after listening to
Tom, he conceded that there were some conspicuous advantages about a
life of crime, and so he consented to be a pirate.

Three miles below St. Petersburg, at a point where the Mississippi
River was a trifle over a mile wide, there was a long, narrow, wooded
island, with a shallow bar at the head of it, and this offered well as
a rendezvous. It was not inhabited; it lay far over toward the further
shore, abreast a dense and almost wholly unpeopled forest. So Jackson's
Island was chosen. Who were to be the subjects of their piracies was a
matter that did not occur to them. Then they hunted up Huckleberry
Finn, and he joined them promptly, for all careers were one to him; he
was indifferent. They presently separated to meet at a lonely spot on
the river-bank two miles above the village at the favorite hour--which
was midnight. There was a small log raft there which they meant to
capture. Each would bring hooks and lines, and such provision as he
could steal in the most dark and mysterious way--as became outlaws. And
before the afternoon was done, they had all managed to enjoy the sweet
glory of spreading the fact that pretty soon the town would "hear
something." All who got this vague hint were cautioned to "be mum and
wait."

About midnight Tom arrived with a boiled ham and a few trifles,
and stopped in a dense undergrowth on a small bluff overlooking the
meeting-place. It was starlight, and very still. The mighty river lay
like an ocean at rest. Tom listened a moment, but no sound disturbed the
quiet. Then he gave a low, distinct whistle. It was answered from under
the bluff. Tom whistled twice more; these signals were answered in the
same way. Then a guarded voice said:

"Who goes there?"

"Tom Sawyer, the Black Avenger of the Spanish Main. Name your names."

"Huck Finn the Red-Handed, and Joe Harper the Terror of the Seas." Tom
had furnished these titles, from his favorite literature.

"'Tis well. Give the countersign."

Two hoarse whispers delivered the same awful word simultaneously to
the brooding night:

"BLOOD!"

Then Tom tumbled his ham over the bluff and let himself down after it,
tearing both skin and clothes to some extent in the effort. There was
an easy, comfortable path along the shore under the bluff, but it
lacked the advantages of difficulty and danger so valued by a pirate.

The Terror of the Seas had brought a side of bacon, and had about worn
himself out with getting it there. Finn the Red-Handed had stolen a
skillet and a quantity of half-cured leaf tobacco, and had also brought
a few corn-cobs to make pipes with. But none of the pirates smoked or
"chewed" but himself. The Black Avenger of the Spanish Main said it
would never do to start without some fire. That was a wise thought;
matches were hardly known there in that day. They saw a fire
smouldering upon a great raft a hundred yards above, and they went
stealthily thither and helped themselves to a chunk. They made an
imposing adventure of it, saying, "Hist!" every now and then, and
suddenly halting with finger on lip; moving with hands on imaginary
dagger-hilts; and giving orders in dismal whispers that if "the foe"
stirred, to "let him have it to the hilt," because "dead men tell no
tales." They knew well enough that the raftsmen were all down at the
village laying in stores or having a spree, but still that was no
excuse for their conducting this thing in an unpiratical way.

They shoved off, presently, Tom in command, Huck at the after oar and
Joe at the forward. Tom stood amidships, gloomy-browed, and with folded
arms, and gave his orders in a low, stern whisper:

"Luff, and bring her to the wind!"

"Aye-aye, sir!"

"Steady, steady-y-y-y!"

"Steady it is, sir!"

"Let her go off a point!"

"Point it is, sir!"

As the boys steadily and monotonously drove the raft toward mid-stream
it was no doubt understood that these orders were given only for
"style," and were not intended to mean anything in particular.

"What sail's she carrying?"

"Courses, tops'ls, and flying-jib, sir."

"Send the r'yals up! Lay out aloft, there, half a dozen of ye
--foretopmaststuns'l! Lively, now!"

"Aye-aye, sir!"

"Shake out that maintogalans'l! Sheets and braces! NOW my hearties!"

"Aye-aye, sir!"

"Hellum-a-lee--hard a port! Stand by to meet her when she comes! Port,
port! NOW, men! With a will! Stead-y-y-y!"

"Steady it is, sir!"

The raft drew beyond the middle of the river; the boys pointed her
head right, and then lay on their oars. The river was not high, so
there was not more than a two or three mile current. Hardly a word was
said during the next three-quarters of an hour. Now the raft was
passing before the distant town. Two or three glimmering lights showed
where it lay, peacefully sleeping, beyond the vague vast sweep of
star-gemmed water, unconscious of the tremendous event that was happening.
The Black Avenger stood still with folded arms, "looking his last" upon
the scene of his former joys and his later sufferings, and wishing
"she" could see him now, abroad on the wild sea, facing peril and death
with dauntless heart, going to his doom with a grim smile on his lips.
It was but a small strain on his imagination to remove Jackson's Island
beyond eyeshot of the village, and so he "looked his last" with a
broken and satisfied heart. The other pirates were looking their last,
too; and they all looked so long that they came near letting the
current drift them out of the range of the island. But they discovered
the danger in time, and made shift to avert it. About two o'clock in
the morning the raft grounded on the bar two hundred yards above the
head of the island, and they waded back and forth until they had landed
their freight. Part of the little raft's belongings consisted of an old
sail, and this they spread over a nook in the bushes for a tent to
shelter their provisions; but they themselves would sleep in the open
air in good weather, as became outlaws.

They built a fire against the side of a great log twenty or thirty
steps within the sombre depths of the forest, and then cooked some
bacon in the frying-pan for supper, and used up half of the corn "pone"
stock they had brought. It seemed glorious sport to be feasting in that
wild, free way in the virgin forest of an unexplored and uninhabited
island, far from the haunts of men, and they said they never would
return to civilization. The climbing fire lit up their faces and threw
its ruddy glare upon the pillared tree-trunks of their forest temple,
and upon the varnished foliage and festooning vines.

When the last crisp slice of bacon was gone, and the last allowance of
corn pone devoured, the boys stretched themselves out on the grass,
filled with contentment. They could have found a cooler place, but they
would not deny themselves such a romantic feature as the roasting
camp-fire.

"AIN'T it gay?" said Joe.

"It's NUTS!" said Tom. "What would the boys say if they could see us?"

"Say? Well, they'd just die to be here--hey, Hucky!"

"I reckon so," said Huckleberry; "anyways, I'm suited. I don't want
nothing better'n this. I don't ever get enough to eat, gen'ally--and
here they can't come and pick at a feller and bullyrag him so."

"It's just the life for me," said Tom. "You don't have to get up,
mornings, and you don't have to go to school, and wash, and all that
blame foolishness. You see a pirate don't have to do ANYTHING, Joe,
when he's ashore, but a hermit HE has to be praying considerable, and
then he don't have any fun, anyway, all by himself that way."

"Oh yes, that's so," said Joe, "but I hadn't thought much about it,
you know. I'd a good deal rather be a pirate, now that I've tried it."

"You see," said Tom, "people don't go much on hermits, nowadays, like
they used to in old times, but a pirate's always respected. And a
hermit's got to sleep on the hardest place he can find, and put
sackcloth and ashes on his head, and stand out in the rain, and--"

"What does he put sackcloth and ashes on his head for?" inquired Huck.

"I dono. But they've GOT to do it. Hermits always do. You'd have to do
that if you was a hermit."

"Dern'd if I would," said Huck.

"Well, what would you do?"

"I dono. But I wouldn't do that."

"Why, Huck, you'd HAVE to. How'd you get around it?"

"Why, I just wouldn't stand it. I'd run away."

"Run away! Well, you WOULD be a nice old slouch of a hermit. You'd be
a disgrace."

The Red-Handed made no response, being better employed. He had
finished gouging out a cob, and now he fitted a weed stem to it, loaded
it with tobacco, and was pressing a coal to the charge and blowing a
cloud of fragrant smoke--he was in the full bloom of luxurious
contentment. The other pirates envied him this majestic vice, and
secretly resolved to acquire it shortly. Presently Huck said:

"What does pirates have to do?"

Tom said:

"Oh, they have just a bully time--take ships and burn them, and get
the money and bury it in awful places in their island where there's
ghosts and things to watch it, and kill everybody in the ships--make
'em walk a plank."

"And they carry the women to the island," said Joe; "they don't kill
the women."

"No," assented Tom, "they don't kill the women--they're too noble. And
the women's always beautiful, too.

"And don't they wear the bulliest clothes! Oh no! All gold and silver
and di'monds," said Joe, with enthusiasm.

"Who?" said Huck.

"Why, the pirates."

Huck scanned his own clothing forlornly.

"I reckon I ain't dressed fitten for a pirate," said he, with a
regretful pathos in his voice; "but I ain't got none but these."

But the other boys told him the fine clothes would come fast enough,
after they should have begun their adventures. They made him understand
that his poor rags would do to begin with, though it was customary for
wealthy pirates to start with a proper wardrobe.

Gradually their talk died out and drowsiness began to steal upon the
eyelids of the little waifs. The pipe dropped from the fingers of the
Red-Handed, and he slept the sleep of the conscience-free and the
weary. The Terror of the Seas and the Black Avenger of the Spanish Main
had more difficulty in getting to sleep. They said their prayers
inwardly, and lying down, since there was nobody there with authority
to make them kneel and recite aloud; in truth, they had a mind not to
say them at all, but they were afraid to proceed to such lengths as
that, lest they might call down a sudden and special thunderbolt from
heaven. Then at once they reached and hovered upon the imminent verge
of sleep--but an intruder came, now, that would not "down." It was
conscience. They began to feel a vague fear that they had been doing
wrong to run away; and next they thought of the stolen meat, and then
the real torture came. They tried to argue it away by reminding
conscience that they had purloined sweetmeats and apples scores of
times; but conscience was not to be appeased by such thin
plausibilities; it seemed to them, in the end, that there was no
getting around the stubborn fact that taking sweetmeats was only
"hooking," while taking bacon and hams and such valuables was plain
simple stealing--and there was a command against that in the Bible. So
they inwardly resolved that so long as they remained in the business,
their piracies should not again be sullied with the crime of stealing.
Then conscience granted a truce, and these curiously inconsistent
pirates fell peacefully to sleep.



CHAPTER XIV

WHEN Tom awoke in the morning, he wondered where he was. He sat up and
rubbed his eyes and looked around. Then he comprehended. It was the
cool gray dawn, and there was a delicious sense of repose and peace in
the deep pervading calm and silence of the woods. Not a leaf stirred;
not a sound obtruded upon great Nature's meditation. Beaded dewdrops
stood upon the leaves and grasses. A white layer of ashes covered the
fire, and a thin blue breath of smoke rose straight into the air. Joe
and Huck still slept.

Now, far away in the woods a bird called; another answered; presently
the hammering of a woodpecker was heard. Gradually the cool dim gray of
the morning whitened, and as gradually sounds multiplied and life
manifested itself. The marvel of Nature shaking off sleep and going to
work unfolded itself to the musing boy. A little green worm came
crawling over a dewy leaf, lifting two-thirds of his body into the air
from time to time and "sniffing around," then proceeding again--for he
was measuring, Tom said; and when the worm approached him, of its own
accord, he sat as still as a stone, with his hopes rising and falling,
by turns, as the creature still came toward him or seemed inclined to
go elsewhere; and when at last it considered a painful moment with its
curved body in the air and then came decisively down upon Tom's leg and
began a journey over him, his whole heart was glad--for that meant that
he was going to have a new suit of clothes--without the shadow of a
doubt a gaudy piratical uniform. Now a procession of ants appeared,
from nowhere in particular, and went about their labors; one struggled
manfully by with a dead spider five times as big as itself in its arms,
and lugged it straight up a tree-trunk. A brown spotted lady-bug
climbed the dizzy height of a grass blade, and Tom bent down close to
it and said, "Lady-bug, lady-bug, fly away home, your house is on fire,
your children's alone," and she took wing and went off to see about it
--which did not surprise the boy, for he knew of old that this insect was
credulous about conflagrations, and he had practised upon its
simplicity more than once. A tumblebug came next, heaving sturdily at
its ball, and Tom touched the creature, to see it shut its legs against
its body and pretend to be dead. The birds were fairly rioting by this
time. A catbird, the Northern mocker, lit in a tree over Tom's head,
and trilled out her imitations of her neighbors in a rapture of
enjoyment; then a shrill jay swept down, a flash of blue flame, and
stopped on a twig almost within the boy's reach, cocked his head to one
side and eyed the strangers with a consuming curiosity; a gray squirrel
and a big fellow of the "fox" kind came skurrying along, sitting up at
intervals to inspect and chatter at the boys, for the wild things had
probably never seen a human being before and scarcely knew whether to
be afraid or not. All Nature was wide awake and stirring, now; long
lances of sunlight pierced down through the dense foliage far and near,
and a few butterflies came fluttering upon the scene.

Tom stirred up the other pirates and they all clattered away with a
shout, and in a minute or two were stripped and chasing after and
tumbling over each other in the shallow limpid water of the white
sandbar. They felt no longing for the little village sleeping in the
distance beyond the majestic waste of water. A vagrant current or a
slight rise in the river had carried off their raft, but this only
gratified them, since its going was something like burning the bridge
between them and civilization.

They came back to camp wonderfully refreshed, glad-hearted, and
ravenous; and they soon had the camp-fire blazing up again. Huck found
a spring of clear cold water close by, and the boys made cups of broad
oak or hickory leaves, and felt that water, sweetened with such a
wildwood charm as that, would be a good enough substitute for coffee.
While Joe was slicing bacon for breakfast, Tom and Huck asked him to
hold on a minute; they stepped to a promising nook in the river-bank
and threw in their lines; almost immediately they had reward. Joe had
not had time to get impatient before they were back again with some
handsome bass, a couple of sun-perch and a small catfish--provisions
enough for quite a family. They fried the fish with the bacon, and were
astonished; for no fish had ever seemed so delicious before. They did
not know that the quicker a fresh-water fish is on the fire after he is
caught the better he is; and they reflected little upon what a sauce
open-air sleeping, open-air exercise, bathing, and a large ingredient
of hunger make, too.

They lay around in the shade, after breakfast, while Huck had a smoke,
and then went off through the woods on an exploring expedition. They
tramped gayly along, over decaying logs, through tangled underbrush,
among solemn monarchs of the forest, hung from their crowns to the
ground with a drooping regalia of grape-vines. Now and then they came
upon snug nooks carpeted with grass and jeweled with flowers.

They found plenty of things to be delighted with, but nothing to be
astonished at. They discovered that the island was about three miles
long and a quarter of a mile wide, and that the shore it lay closest to
was only separated from it by a narrow channel hardly two hundred yards
wide. They took a swim about every hour, so it was close upon the
middle of the afternoon when they got back to camp. They were too
hungry to stop to fish, but they fared sumptuously upon cold ham, and
then threw themselves down in the shade to talk. But the talk soon
began to drag, and then died. The stillness, the solemnity that brooded
in the woods, and the sense of loneliness, began to tell upon the
spirits of the boys. They fell to thinking. A sort of undefined longing
crept upon them. This took dim shape, presently--it was budding
homesickness. Even Finn the Red-Handed was dreaming of his doorsteps
and empty hogsheads. But they were all ashamed of their weakness, and
none was brave enough to speak his thought.

For some time, now, the boys had been dully conscious of a peculiar
sound in the distance, just as one sometimes is of the ticking of a
clock which he takes no distinct note of. But now this mysterious sound
became more pronounced, and forced a recognition. The boys started,
glanced at each other, and then each assumed a listening attitude.
There was a long silence, profound and unbroken; then a deep, sullen
boom came floating down out of the distance.

"What is it!" exclaimed Joe, under his breath.

"I wonder," said Tom in a whisper.

"'Tain't thunder," said Huckleberry, in an awed tone, "becuz thunder--"

"Hark!" said Tom. "Listen--don't talk."

They waited a time that seemed an age, and then the same muffled boom
troubled the solemn hush.

"Let's go and see."

They sprang to their feet and hurried to the shore toward the town.
They parted the bushes on the bank and peered out over the water. The
little steam ferryboat was about a mile below the village, drifting
with the current. Her broad deck seemed crowded with people. There were
a great many skiffs rowing about or floating with the stream in the
neighborhood of the ferryboat, but the boys could not determine what
the men in them were doing. Presently a great jet of white smoke burst
from the ferryboat's side, and as it expanded and rose in a lazy cloud,
that same dull throb of sound was borne to the listeners again.

"I know now!" exclaimed Tom; "somebody's drownded!"

"That's it!" said Huck; "they done that last summer, when Bill Turner
got drownded; they shoot a cannon over the water, and that makes him
come up to the top. Yes, and they take loaves of bread and put
quicksilver in 'em and set 'em afloat, and wherever there's anybody
that's drownded, they'll float right there and stop."

"Yes, I've heard about that," said Joe. "I wonder what makes the bread
do that."

"Oh, it ain't the bread, so much," said Tom; "I reckon it's mostly
what they SAY over it before they start it out."

"But they don't say anything over it," said Huck. "I've seen 'em and
they don't."

"Well, that's funny," said Tom. "But maybe they say it to themselves.
Of COURSE they do. Anybody might know that."

The other boys agreed that there was reason in what Tom said, because
an ignorant lump of bread, uninstructed by an incantation, could not be
expected to act very intelligently when set upon an errand of such
gravity.

"By jings, I wish I was over there, now," said Joe.

"I do too" said Huck "I'd give heaps to know who it is."

The boys still listened and watched. Presently a revealing thought
flashed through Tom's mind, and he exclaimed:

"Boys, I know who's drownded--it's us!"

They felt like heroes in an instant. Here was a gorgeous triumph; they
were missed; they were mourned; hearts were breaking on their account;
tears were being shed; accusing memories of unkindness to these poor
lost lads were rising up, and unavailing regrets and remorse were being
indulged; and best of all, the departed were the talk of the whole
town, and the envy of all the boys, as far as this dazzling notoriety
was concerned. This was fine. It was worth while to be a pirate, after
all.

As twilight drew on, the ferryboat went back to her accustomed
business and the skiffs disappeared. The pirates returned to camp. They
were jubilant with vanity over their new grandeur and the illustrious
trouble they were making. They caught fish, cooked supper and ate it,
and then fell to guessing at what the village was thinking and saying
about them; and the pictures they drew of the public distress on their
account were gratifying to look upon--from their point of view. But
when the shadows of night closed them in, they gradually ceased to
talk, and sat gazing into the fire, with their minds evidently
wandering elsewhere. The excitement was gone, now, and Tom and Joe
could not keep back thoughts of certain persons at home who were not
enjoying this fine frolic as much as they were. Misgivings came; they
grew troubled and unhappy; a sigh or two escaped, unawares. By and by
Joe timidly ventured upon a roundabout "feeler" as to how the others
might look upon a return to civilization--not right now, but--

Tom withered him with derision! Huck, being uncommitted as yet, joined
in with Tom, and the waverer quickly "explained," and was glad to get
out of the scrape with as little taint of chicken-hearted homesickness
clinging to his garments as he could. Mutiny was effectually laid to
rest for the moment.

As the night deepened, Huck began to nod, and presently to snore. Joe
followed next. Tom lay upon his elbow motionless, for some time,
watching the two intently. At last he got up cautiously, on his knees,
and went searching among the grass and the flickering reflections flung
by the camp-fire. He picked up and inspected several large
semi-cylinders of the thin white bark of a sycamore, and finally chose
two which seemed to suit him. Then he knelt by the fire and painfully
wrote something upon each of these with his "red keel"; one he rolled up
and put in his jacket pocket, and the other he put in Joe's hat and
removed it to a little distance from the owner. And he also put into the
hat certain schoolboy treasures of almost inestimable value--among them
a lump of chalk, an India-rubber ball, three fishhooks, and one of that
kind of marbles known as a "sure 'nough crystal." Then he tiptoed his
way cautiously among the trees till he felt that he was out of hearing,
and straightway broke into a keen run in the direction of the sandbar.



CHAPTER XV

A FEW minutes later Tom was in the shoal water of the bar, wading
toward the Illinois shore. Before the depth reached his middle he was
half-way over; the current would permit no more wading, now, so he
struck out confidently to swim the remaining hundred yards. He swam
quartering upstream, but still was swept downward rather faster than he
had expected. However, he reached the shore finally, and drifted along
till he found a low place and drew himself out. He put his hand on his
jacket pocket, found his piece of bark safe, and then struck through
the woods, following the shore, with streaming garments. Shortly before
ten o'clock he came out into an open place opposite the village, and
saw the ferryboat lying in the shadow of the trees and the high bank.
Everything was quiet under the blinking stars. He crept down the bank,
watching with all his eyes, slipped into the water, swam three or four
strokes and climbed into the skiff that did "yawl" duty at the boat's
stern. He laid himself down under the thwarts and waited, panting.

Presently the cracked bell tapped and a voice gave the order to "cast
off." A minute or two later the skiff's head was standing high up,
against the boat's swell, and the voyage was begun. Tom felt happy in
his success, for he knew it was the boat's last trip for the night. At
the end of a long twelve or fifteen minutes the wheels stopped, and Tom
slipped overboard and swam ashore in the dusk, landing fifty yards
downstream, out of danger of possible stragglers.

He flew along unfrequented alleys, and shortly found himself at his
aunt's back fence. He climbed over, approached the "ell," and looked in
at the sitting-room window, for a light was burning there. There sat
Aunt Polly, Sid, Mary, and Joe Harper's mother, grouped together,
talking. They were by the bed, and the bed was between them and the
door. Tom went to the door and began to softly lift the latch; then he
pressed gently and the door yielded a crack; he continued pushing
cautiously, and quaking every time it creaked, till he judged he might
squeeze through on his knees; so he put his head through and began,
warily.

"What makes the candle blow so?" said Aunt Polly. Tom hurried up.
"Why, that door's open, I believe. Why, of course it is. No end of
strange things now. Go 'long and shut it, Sid."

Tom disappeared under the bed just in time. He lay and "breathed"
himself for a time, and then crept to where he could almost touch his
aunt's foot.

"But as I was saying," said Aunt Polly, "he warn't BAD, so to say
--only mischEEvous. Only just giddy, and harum-scarum, you know. He
warn't any more responsible than a colt. HE never meant any harm, and
he was the best-hearted boy that ever was"--and she began to cry.

"It was just so with my Joe--always full of his devilment, and up to
every kind of mischief, but he was just as unselfish and kind as he
could be--and laws bless me, to think I went and whipped him for taking
that cream, never once recollecting that I throwed it out myself
because it was sour, and I never to see him again in this world, never,
never, never, poor abused boy!" And Mrs. Harper sobbed as if her heart
would break.

"I hope Tom's better off where he is," said Sid, "but if he'd been
better in some ways--"

"SID!" Tom felt the glare of the old lady's eye, though he could not
see it. "Not a word against my Tom, now that he's gone! God'll take
care of HIM--never you trouble YOURself, sir! Oh, Mrs. Harper, I don't
know how to give him up! I don't know how to give him up! He was such a
comfort to me, although he tormented my old heart out of me, 'most."

"The Lord giveth and the Lord hath taken away--Blessed be the name of
the Lord! But it's so hard--Oh, it's so hard! Only last Saturday my
Joe busted a firecracker right under my nose and I knocked him
sprawling. Little did I know then, how soon--Oh, if it was to do over
again I'd hug him and bless him for it."

"Yes, yes, yes, I know just how you feel, Mrs. Harper, I know just
exactly how you feel. No longer ago than yesterday noon, my Tom took
and filled the cat full of Pain-killer, and I did think the cretur
would tear the house down. And God forgive me, I cracked Tom's head
with my thimble, poor boy, poor dead boy. But he's out of all his
troubles now. And the last words I ever heard him say was to reproach--"

But this memory was too much for the old lady, and she broke entirely
down. Tom was snuffling, now, himself--and more in pity of himself than
anybody else. He could hear Mary crying, and putting in a kindly word
for him from time to time. He began to have a nobler opinion of himself
than ever before. Still, he was sufficiently touched by his aunt's
grief to long to rush out from under the bed and overwhelm her with
joy--and the theatrical gorgeousness of the thing appealed strongly to
his nature, too, but he resisted and lay still.

He went on listening, and gathered by odds and ends that it was
conjectured at first that the boys had got drowned while taking a swim;
then the small raft had been missed; next, certain boys said the
missing lads had promised that the village should "hear something"
soon; the wise-heads had "put this and that together" and decided that
the lads had gone off on that raft and would turn up at the next town
below, presently; but toward noon the raft had been found, lodged
against the Missouri shore some five or six miles below the village
--and then hope perished; they must be drowned, else hunger would have
driven them home by nightfall if not sooner. It was believed that the
search for the bodies had been a fruitless effort merely because the
drowning must have occurred in mid-channel, since the boys, being good
swimmers, would otherwise have escaped to shore. This was Wednesday
night. If the bodies continued missing until Sunday, all hope would be
given over, and the funerals would be preached on that morning. Tom
shuddered.

Mrs. Harper gave a sobbing good-night and turned to go. Then with a
mutual impulse the two bereaved women flung themselves into each
other's arms and had a good, consoling cry, and then parted. Aunt Polly
was tender far beyond her wont, in her good-night to Sid and Mary. Sid
snuffled a bit and Mary went off crying with all her heart.

Aunt Polly knelt down and prayed for Tom so touchingly, so
appealingly, and with such measureless love in her words and her old
trembling voice, that he was weltering in tears again, long before she
was through.

He had to keep still long after she went to bed, for she kept making
broken-hearted ejaculations from time to time, tossing unrestfully, and
turning over. But at last she was still, only moaning a little in her
sleep. Now the boy stole out, rose gradually by the bedside, shaded the
candle-light with his hand, and stood regarding her. His heart was full
of pity for her. He took out his sycamore scroll and placed it by the
candle. But something occurred to him, and he lingered considering. His
face lighted with a happy solution of his thought; he put the bark
hastily in his pocket. Then he bent over and kissed the faded lips, and
straightway made his stealthy exit, latching the door behind him.

He threaded his way back to the ferry landing, found nobody at large
there, and walked boldly on board the boat, for he knew she was
tenantless except that there was a watchman, who always turned in and
slept like a graven image. He untied the skiff at the stern, slipped
into it, and was soon rowing cautiously upstream. When he had pulled a
mile above the village, he started quartering across and bent himself
stoutly to his work. He hit the landing on the other side neatly, for
this was a familiar bit of work to him. He was moved to capture the
skiff, arguing that it might be considered a ship and therefore
legitimate prey for a pirate, but he knew a thorough search would be
made for it and that might end in revelations. So he stepped ashore and
entered the woods.

He sat down and took a long rest, torturing himself meanwhile to keep
awake, and then started warily down the home-stretch. The night was far
spent. It was broad daylight before he found himself fairly abreast the
island bar. He rested again until the sun was well up and gilding the
great river with its splendor, and then he plunged into the stream. A
little later he paused, dripping, upon the threshold of the camp, and
heard Joe say:

"No, Tom's true-blue, Huck, and he'll come back. He won't desert. He
knows that would be a disgrace to a pirate, and Tom's too proud for
that sort of thing. He's up to something or other. Now I wonder what?"

"Well, the things is ours, anyway, ain't they?"

Pretty near, but not yet, Huck. The writing says they are if he ain't
back here to breakfast."

"Which he is!" exclaimed Tom, with fine dramatic effect, stepping
grandly into camp.

A sumptuous breakfast of bacon and fish was shortly provided, and as
the boys set to work upon it, Tom recounted (and adorned) his
adventures. They were a vain and boastful company of heroes when the
tale was done. Then Tom hid himself away in a shady nook to sleep till
noon, and the other pirates got ready to fish and explore.



CHAPTER XVI

AFTER dinner all the gang turned out to hunt for turtle eggs on the
bar. They went about poking sticks into the sand, and when they found a
soft place they went down on their knees and dug with their hands.
Sometimes they would take fifty or sixty eggs out of one hole. They
were perfectly round white things a trifle smaller than an English
walnut. They had a famous fried-egg feast that night, and another on
Friday morning.

After breakfast they went whooping and prancing out on the bar, and
chased each other round and round, shedding clothes as they went, until
they were naked, and then continued the frolic far away up the shoal
water of the bar, against the stiff current, which latter tripped their
legs from under them from time to time and greatly increased the fun.
And now and then they stooped in a group and splashed water in each
other's faces with their palms, gradually approaching each other, with
averted faces to avoid the strangling sprays, and finally gripping and
struggling till the best man ducked his neighbor, and then they all
went under in a tangle of white legs and arms and came up blowing,
sputtering, laughing, and gasping for breath at one and the same time.

When they were well exhausted, they would run out and sprawl on the
dry, hot sand, and lie there and cover themselves up with it, and by
and by break for the water again and go through the original
performance once more. Finally it occurred to them that their naked
skin represented flesh-colored "tights" very fairly; so they drew a
ring in the sand and had a circus--with three clowns in it, for none
would yield this proudest post to his neighbor.

Next they got their marbles and played "knucks" and "ring-taw" and
"keeps" till that amusement grew stale. Then Joe and Huck had another
swim, but Tom would not venture, because he found that in kicking off
his trousers he had kicked his string of rattlesnake rattles off his
ankle, and he wondered how he had escaped cramp so long without the
protection of this mysterious charm. He did not venture again until he
had found it, and by that time the other boys were tired and ready to
rest. They gradually wandered apart, dropped into the "dumps," and fell
to gazing longingly across the wide river to where the village lay
drowsing in the sun. Tom found himself writing "BECKY" in the sand with
his big toe; he scratched it out, and was angry with himself for his
weakness. But he wrote it again, nevertheless; he could not help it. He
erased it once more and then took himself out of temptation by driving
the other boys together and joining them.

But Joe's spirits had gone down almost beyond resurrection. He was so
homesick that he could hardly endure the misery of it. The tears lay
very near the surface. Huck was melancholy, too. Tom was downhearted,
but tried hard not to show it. He had a secret which he was not ready
to tell, yet, but if this mutinous depression was not broken up soon,
he would have to bring it out. He said, with a great show of
cheerfulness:

"I bet there's been pirates on this island before, boys. We'll explore
it again. They've hid treasures here somewhere. How'd you feel to light
on a rotten chest full of gold and silver--hey?"

But it roused only faint enthusiasm, which faded out, with no reply.
Tom tried one or two other seductions; but they failed, too. It was
discouraging work. Joe sat poking up the sand with a stick and looking
very gloomy. Finally he said:

"Oh, boys, let's give it up. I want to go home. It's so lonesome."

"Oh no, Joe, you'll feel better by and by," said Tom. "Just think of
the fishing that's here."

"I don't care for fishing. I want to go home."

"But, Joe, there ain't such another swimming-place anywhere."

"Swimming's no good. I don't seem to care for it, somehow, when there
ain't anybody to say I sha'n't go in. I mean to go home."

"Oh, shucks! Baby! You want to see your mother, I reckon."

"Yes, I DO want to see my mother--and you would, too, if you had one.
I ain't any more baby than you are." And Joe snuffled a little.

"Well, we'll let the cry-baby go home to his mother, won't we, Huck?
Poor thing--does it want to see its mother? And so it shall. You like
it here, don't you, Huck? We'll stay, won't we?"

Huck said, "Y-e-s"--without any heart in it.

"I'll never speak to you again as long as I live," said Joe, rising.
"There now!" And he moved moodily away and began to dress himself.

"Who cares!" said Tom. "Nobody wants you to. Go 'long home and get
laughed at. Oh, you're a nice pirate. Huck and me ain't cry-babies.
We'll stay, won't we, Huck? Let him go if he wants to. I reckon we can
get along without him, per'aps."

But Tom was uneasy, nevertheless, and was alarmed to see Joe go
sullenly on with his dressing. And then it was discomforting to see
Huck eying Joe's preparations so wistfully, and keeping up such an
ominous silence. Presently, without a parting word, Joe began to wade
off toward the Illinois shore. Tom's heart began to sink. He glanced at
Huck. Huck could not bear the look, and dropped his eyes. Then he said:

"I want to go, too, Tom. It was getting so lonesome anyway, and now
it'll be worse. Let's us go, too, Tom."

"I won't! You can all go, if you want to. I mean to stay."

"Tom, I better go."

"Well, go 'long--who's hendering you."

Huck began to pick up his scattered clothes. He said:

"Tom, I wisht you'd come, too. Now you think it over. We'll wait for
you when we get to shore."

"Well, you'll wait a blame long time, that's all."

Huck started sorrowfully away, and Tom stood looking after him, with a
strong desire tugging at his heart to yield his pride and go along too.
He hoped the boys would stop, but they still waded slowly on. It
suddenly dawned on Tom that it was become very lonely and still. He
made one final struggle with his pride, and then darted after his
comrades, yelling:

"Wait! Wait! I want to tell you something!"

They presently stopped and turned around. When he got to where they
were, he began unfolding his secret, and they listened moodily till at
last they saw the "point" he was driving at, and then they set up a
war-whoop of applause and said it was "splendid!" and said if he had
told them at first, they wouldn't have started away. He made a plausible
excuse; but his real reason had been the fear that not even the secret
would keep them with him any very great length of time, and so he had
meant to hold it in reserve as a last seduction.

The lads came gayly back and went at their sports again with a will,
chattering all the time about Tom's stupendous plan and admiring the
genius of it. After a dainty egg and fish dinner, Tom said he wanted to
learn to smoke, now. Joe caught at the idea and said he would like to
try, too. So Huck made pipes and filled them. These novices had never
smoked anything before but cigars made of grape-vine, and they "bit"
the tongue, and were not considered manly anyway.

Now they stretched themselves out on their elbows and began to puff,
charily, and with slender confidence. The smoke had an unpleasant
taste, and they gagged a little, but Tom said:

"Why, it's just as easy! If I'd a knowed this was all, I'd a learnt
long ago."

"So would I," said Joe. "It's just nothing."

"Why, many a time I've looked at people smoking, and thought well I
wish I could do that; but I never thought I could," said Tom.

"That's just the way with me, hain't it, Huck? You've heard me talk
just that way--haven't you, Huck? I'll leave it to Huck if I haven't."

"Yes--heaps of times," said Huck.

"Well, I have too," said Tom; "oh, hundreds of times. Once down by the
slaughter-house. Don't you remember, Huck? Bob Tanner was there, and
Johnny Miller, and Jeff Thatcher, when I said it. Don't you remember,
Huck, 'bout me saying that?"

"Yes, that's so," said Huck. "That was the day after I lost a white
alley. No, 'twas the day before."

"There--I told you so," said Tom. "Huck recollects it."

"I bleeve I could smoke this pipe all day," said Joe. "I don't feel
sick."

"Neither do I," said Tom. "I could smoke it all day. But I bet you
Jeff Thatcher couldn't."

"Jeff Thatcher! Why, he'd keel over just with two draws. Just let him
try it once. HE'D see!"

"I bet he would. And Johnny Miller--I wish could see Johnny Miller
tackle it once."

"Oh, don't I!" said Joe. "Why, I bet you Johnny Miller couldn't any
more do this than nothing. Just one little snifter would fetch HIM."

"'Deed it would, Joe. Say--I wish the boys could see us now."

"So do I."

"Say--boys, don't say anything about it, and some time when they're
around, I'll come up to you and say, 'Joe, got a pipe? I want a smoke.'
And you'll say, kind of careless like, as if it warn't anything, you'll
say, 'Yes, I got my OLD pipe, and another one, but my tobacker ain't
very good.' And I'll say, 'Oh, that's all right, if it's STRONG
enough.' And then you'll out with the pipes, and we'll light up just as
ca'm, and then just see 'em look!"

"By jings, that'll be gay, Tom! I wish it was NOW!"

"So do I! And when we tell 'em we learned when we was off pirating,
won't they wish they'd been along?"

"Oh, I reckon not! I'll just BET they will!"

So the talk ran on. But presently it began to flag a trifle, and grow
disjointed. The silences widened; the expectoration marvellously
increased. Every pore inside the boys' cheeks became a spouting
fountain; they could scarcely bail out the cellars under their tongues
fast enough to prevent an inundation; little overflowings down their
throats occurred in spite of all they could do, and sudden retchings
followed every time. Both boys were looking very pale and miserable,
now. Joe's pipe dropped from his nerveless fingers. Tom's followed.
Both fountains were going furiously and both pumps bailing with might
and main. Joe said feebly:

"I've lost my knife. I reckon I better go and find it."

Tom said, with quivering lips and halting utterance:

"I'll help you. You go over that way and I'll hunt around by the
spring. No, you needn't come, Huck--we can find it."

So Huck sat down again, and waited an hour. Then he found it lonesome,
and went to find his comrades. They were wide apart in the woods, both
very pale, both fast asleep. But something informed him that if they
had had any trouble they had got rid of it.

They were not talkative at supper that night. They had a humble look,
and when Huck prepared his pipe after the meal and was going to prepare
theirs, they said no, they were not feeling very well--something they
ate at dinner had disagreed with them.

About midnight Joe awoke, and called the boys. There was a brooding
oppressiveness in the air that seemed to bode something. The boys
huddled themselves together and sought the friendly companionship of
the fire, though the dull dead heat of the breathless atmosphere was
stifling. They sat still, intent and waiting. The solemn hush
continued. Beyond the light of the fire everything was swallowed up in
the blackness of darkness. Presently there came a quivering glow that
vaguely revealed the foliage for a moment and then vanished. By and by
another came, a little stronger. Then another. Then a faint moan came
sighing through the branches of the forest and the boys felt a fleeting
breath upon their cheeks, and shuddered with the fancy that the Spirit
of the Night had gone by. There was a pause. Now a weird flash turned
night into day and showed every little grass-blade, separate and
distinct, that grew about their feet. And it showed three white,
startled faces, too. A deep peal of thunder went rolling and tumbling
down the heavens and lost itself in sullen rumblings in the distance. A
sweep of chilly air passed by, rustling all the leaves and snowing the
flaky ashes broadcast about the fire. Another fierce glare lit up the
forest and an instant crash followed that seemed to rend the tree-tops
right over the boys' heads. They clung together in terror, in the thick
gloom that followed. A few big rain-drops fell pattering upon the
leaves.

"Quick! boys, go for the tent!" exclaimed Tom.

They sprang away, stumbling over roots and among vines in the dark, no
two plunging in the same direction. A furious blast roared through the
trees, making everything sing as it went. One blinding flash after
another came, and peal on peal of deafening thunder. And now a
drenching rain poured down and the rising hurricane drove it in sheets
along the ground. The boys cried out to each other, but the roaring
wind and the booming thunder-blasts drowned their voices utterly.
However, one by one they straggled in at last and took shelter under
the tent, cold, scared, and streaming with water; but to have company
in misery seemed something to be grateful for. They could not talk, the
old sail flapped so furiously, even if the other noises would have
allowed them. The tempest rose higher and higher, and presently the
sail tore loose from its fastenings and went winging away on the blast.
The boys seized each others' hands and fled, with many tumblings and
bruises, to the shelter of a great oak that stood upon the river-bank.
Now the battle was at its highest. Under the ceaseless conflagration of
lightning that flamed in the skies, everything below stood out in
clean-cut and shadowless distinctness: the bending trees, the billowy
river, white with foam, the driving spray of spume-flakes, the dim
outlines of the high bluffs on the other side, glimpsed through the
drifting cloud-rack and the slanting veil of rain. Every little while
some giant tree yielded the fight and fell crashing through the younger
growth; and the unflagging thunder-peals came now in ear-splitting
explosive bursts, keen and sharp, and unspeakably appalling. The storm
culminated in one matchless effort that seemed likely to tear the island
to pieces, burn it up, drown it to the tree-tops, blow it away, and
deafen every creature in it, all at one and the same moment. It was a
wild night for homeless young heads to be out in.

But at last the battle was done, and the forces retired with weaker
and weaker threatenings and grumblings, and peace resumed her sway. The
boys went back to camp, a good deal awed; but they found there was
still something to be thankful for, because the great sycamore, the
shelter of their beds, was a ruin, now, blasted by the lightnings, and
they were not under it when the catastrophe happened.

Everything in camp was drenched, the camp-fire as well; for they were
but heedless lads, like their generation, and had made no provision
against rain. Here was matter for dismay, for they were soaked through
and chilled. They were eloquent in their distress; but they presently
discovered that the fire had eaten so far up under the great log it had
been built against (where it curved upward and separated itself from
the ground), that a handbreadth or so of it had escaped wetting; so
they patiently wrought until, with shreds and bark gathered from the
under sides of sheltered logs, they coaxed the fire to burn again. Then
they piled on great dead boughs till they had a roaring furnace, and
were glad-hearted once more. They dried their boiled ham and had a
feast, and after that they sat by the fire and expanded and glorified
their midnight adventure until morning, for there was not a dry spot to
sleep on, anywhere around.

As the sun began to steal in upon the boys, drowsiness came over them,
and they went out on the sandbar and lay down to sleep. They got
scorched out by and by, and drearily set about getting breakfast. After
the meal they felt rusty, and stiff-jointed, and a little homesick once
more. Tom saw the signs, and fell to cheering up the pirates as well as
he could. But they cared nothing for marbles, or circus, or swimming,
or anything. He reminded them of the imposing secret, and raised a ray
of cheer. While it lasted, he got them interested in a new device. This
was to knock off being pirates, for a while, and be Indians for a
change. They were attracted by this idea; so it was not long before
they were stripped, and striped from head to heel with black mud, like
so many zebras--all of them chiefs, of course--and then they went
tearing through the woods to attack an English settlement.

By and by they separated into three hostile tribes, and darted upon
each other from ambush with dreadful war-whoops, and killed and scalped
each other by thousands. It was a gory day. Consequently it was an
extremely satisfactory one.

They assembled in camp toward supper-time, hungry and happy; but now a
difficulty arose--hostile Indians could not break the bread of
hospitality together without first making peace, and this was a simple
impossibility without smoking a pipe of peace. There was no other
process that ever they had heard of. Two of the savages almost wished
they had remained pirates. However, there was no other way; so with
such show of cheerfulness as they could muster they called for the pipe
and took their whiff as it passed, in due form.

And behold, they were glad they had gone into savagery, for they had
gained something; they found that they could now smoke a little without
having to go and hunt for a lost knife; they did not get sick enough to
be seriously uncomfortable. They were not likely to fool away this high
promise for lack of effort. No, they practised cautiously, after
supper, with right fair success, and so they spent a jubilant evening.
They were prouder and happier in their new acquirement than they would
have been in the scalping and skinning of the Six Nations. We will
leave them to smoke and chatter and brag, since we have no further use
for them at present.



CHAPTER XVII

BUT there was no hilarity in the little town that same tranquil
Saturday afternoon. The Harpers, and Aunt Polly's family, were being
put into mourning, with great grief and many tears. An unusual quiet
possessed the village, although it was ordinarily quiet enough, in all
conscience. The villagers conducted their concerns with an absent air,
and talked little; but they sighed often. The Saturday holiday seemed a
burden to the children. They had no heart in their sports, and
gradually gave them up.

In the afternoon Becky Thatcher found herself moping about the
deserted schoolhouse yard, and feeling very melancholy. But she found
nothing there to comfort her. She soliloquized:

"Oh, if I only had a brass andiron-knob again! But I haven't got
anything now to remember him by." And she choked back a little sob.

Presently she stopped, and said to herself:

"It was right here. Oh, if it was to do over again, I wouldn't say
that--I wouldn't say it for the whole world. But he's gone now; I'll
never, never, never see him any more."

This thought broke her down, and she wandered away, with tears rolling
down her cheeks. Then quite a group of boys and girls--playmates of
Tom's and Joe's--came by, and stood looking over the paling fence and
talking in reverent tones of how Tom did so-and-so the last time they
saw him, and how Joe said this and that small trifle (pregnant with
awful prophecy, as they could easily see now!)--and each speaker
pointed out the exact spot where the lost lads stood at the time, and
then added something like "and I was a-standing just so--just as I am
now, and as if you was him--I was as close as that--and he smiled, just
this way--and then something seemed to go all over me, like--awful, you
know--and I never thought what it meant, of course, but I can see now!"

Then there was a dispute about who saw the dead boys last in life, and
many claimed that dismal distinction, and offered evidences, more or
less tampered with by the witness; and when it was ultimately decided
who DID see the departed last, and exchanged the last words with them,
the lucky parties took upon themselves a sort of sacred importance, and
were gaped at and envied by all the rest. One poor chap, who had no
other grandeur to offer, said with tolerably manifest pride in the
remembrance:

"Well, Tom Sawyer he licked me once."

But that bid for glory was a failure. Most of the boys could say that,
and so that cheapened the distinction too much. The group loitered
away, still recalling memories of the lost heroes, in awed voices.

When the Sunday-school hour was finished, the next morning, the bell
began to toll, instead of ringing in the usual way. It was a very still
Sabbath, and the mournful sound seemed in keeping with the musing hush
that lay upon nature. The villagers began to gather, loitering a moment
in the vestibule to converse in whispers about the sad event. But there
was no whispering in the house; only the funereal rustling of dresses
as the women gathered to their seats disturbed the silence there. None
could remember when the little church had been so full before. There
was finally a waiting pause, an expectant dumbness, and then Aunt Polly
entered, followed by Sid and Mary, and they by the Harper family, all
in deep black, and the whole congregation, the old minister as well,
rose reverently and stood until the mourners were seated in the front
pew. There was another communing silence, broken at intervals by
muffled sobs, and then the minister spread his hands abroad and prayed.
A moving hymn was sung, and the text followed: "I am the Resurrection
and the Life."

As the service proceeded, the clergyman drew such pictures of the
graces, the winning ways, and the rare promise of the lost lads that
every soul there, thinking he recognized these pictures, felt a pang in
remembering that he had persistently blinded himself to them always
before, and had as persistently seen only faults and flaws in the poor
boys. The minister related many a touching incident in the lives of the
departed, too, which illustrated their sweet, generous natures, and the
people could easily see, now, how noble and beautiful those episodes
were, and remembered with grief that at the time they occurred they had
seemed rank rascalities, well deserving of the cowhide. The
congregation became more and more moved, as the pathetic tale went on,
till at last the whole company broke down and joined the weeping
mourners in a chorus of anguished sobs, the preacher himself giving way
to his feelings, and crying in the pulpit.

There was a rustle in the gallery, which nobody noticed; a moment
later the church door creaked; the minister raised his streaming eyes
above his handkerchief, and stood transfixed! First one and then
another pair of eyes followed the minister's, and then almost with one
impulse the congregation rose and stared while the three dead boys came
marching up the aisle, Tom in the lead, Joe next, and Huck, a ruin of
drooping rags, sneaking sheepishly in the rear! They had been hid in
the unused gallery listening to their own funeral sermon!

Aunt Polly, Mary, and the Harpers threw themselves upon their restored
ones, smothered them with kisses and poured out thanksgivings, while
poor Huck stood abashed and uncomfortable, not knowing exactly what to
do or where to hide from so many unwelcoming eyes. He wavered, and
started to slink away, but Tom seized him and said:

"Aunt Polly, it ain't fair. Somebody's got to be glad to see Huck."

"And so they shall. I'm glad to see him, poor motherless thing!" And
the loving attentions Aunt Polly lavished upon him were the one thing
capable of making him more uncomfortable than he was before.

Suddenly the minister shouted at the top of his voice: "Praise God
from whom all blessings flow--SING!--and put your hearts in it!"

And they did. Old Hundred swelled up with a triumphant burst, and
while it shook the rafters Tom Sawyer the Pirate looked around upon the
envying juveniles about him and confessed in his heart that this was
the proudest moment of his life.

As the "sold" congregation trooped out they said they would almost be
willing to be made ridiculous again to hear Old Hundred sung like that
once more.

Tom got more cuffs and kisses that day--according to Aunt Polly's
varying moods--than he had earned before in a year; and he hardly knew
which expressed the most gratefulness to God and affection for himself.



CHAPTER XVIII

THAT was Tom's great secret--the scheme to return home with his
brother pirates and attend their own funerals. They had paddled over to
the Missouri shore on a log, at dusk on Saturday, landing five or six
miles below the village; they had slept in the woods at the edge of the
town till nearly daylight, and had then crept through back lanes and
alleys and finished their sleep in the gallery of the church among a
chaos of invalided benches.

At breakfast, Monday morning, Aunt Polly and Mary were very loving to
Tom, and very attentive to his wants. There was an unusual amount of
talk. In the course of it Aunt Polly said:

"Well, I don't say it wasn't a fine joke, Tom, to keep everybody
suffering 'most a week so you boys had a good time, but it is a pity
you could be so hard-hearted as to let me suffer so. If you could come
over on a log to go to your funeral, you could have come over and give
me a hint some way that you warn't dead, but only run off."

"Yes, you could have done that, Tom," said Mary; "and I believe you
would if you had thought of it."

"Would you, Tom?" said Aunt Polly, her face lighting wistfully. "Say,
now, would you, if you'd thought of it?"

"I--well, I don't know. 'Twould 'a' spoiled everything."

"Tom, I hoped you loved me that much," said Aunt Polly, with a grieved
tone that discomforted the boy. "It would have been something if you'd
cared enough to THINK of it, even if you didn't DO it."

"Now, auntie, that ain't any harm," pleaded Mary; "it's only Tom's
giddy way--he is always in such a rush that he never thinks of
anything."

"More's the pity. Sid would have thought. And Sid would have come and
DONE it, too. Tom, you'll look back, some day, when it's too late, and
wish you'd cared a little more for me when it would have cost you so
little."

"Now, auntie, you know I do care for you," said Tom.

"I'd know it better if you acted more like it."

"I wish now I'd thought," said Tom, with a repentant tone; "but I
dreamt about you, anyway. That's something, ain't it?"

"It ain't much--a cat does that much--but it's better than nothing.
What did you dream?"

"Why, Wednesday night I dreamt that you was sitting over there by the
bed, and Sid was sitting by the woodbox, and Mary next to him."

"Well, so we did. So we always do. I'm glad your dreams could take
even that much trouble about us."

"And I dreamt that Joe Harper's mother was here."

"Why, she was here! Did you dream any more?"

"Oh, lots. But it's so dim, now."

"Well, try to recollect--can't you?"

"Somehow it seems to me that the wind--the wind blowed the--the--"

"Try harder, Tom! The wind did blow something. Come!"

Tom pressed his fingers on his forehead an anxious minute, and then
said:

"I've got it now! I've got it now! It blowed the candle!"

"Mercy on us! Go on, Tom--go on!"

"And it seems to me that you said, 'Why, I believe that that door--'"

"Go ON, Tom!"

"Just let me study a moment--just a moment. Oh, yes--you said you
believed the door was open."

"As I'm sitting here, I did! Didn't I, Mary! Go on!"

"And then--and then--well I won't be certain, but it seems like as if
you made Sid go and--and--"

"Well? Well? What did I make him do, Tom? What did I make him do?"

"You made him--you--Oh, you made him shut it."

"Well, for the land's sake! I never heard the beat of that in all my
days! Don't tell ME there ain't anything in dreams, any more. Sereny
Harper shall know of this before I'm an hour older. I'd like to see her
get around THIS with her rubbage 'bout superstition. Go on, Tom!"

"Oh, it's all getting just as bright as day, now. Next you said I
warn't BAD, only mischeevous and harum-scarum, and not any more
responsible than--than--I think it was a colt, or something."

"And so it was! Well, goodness gracious! Go on, Tom!"

"And then you began to cry."

"So I did. So I did. Not the first time, neither. And then--"

"Then Mrs. Harper she began to cry, and said Joe was just the same,
and she wished she hadn't whipped him for taking cream when she'd
throwed it out her own self--"

"Tom! The sperrit was upon you! You was a prophesying--that's what you
was doing! Land alive, go on, Tom!"

"Then Sid he said--he said--"

"I don't think I said anything," said Sid.

"Yes you did, Sid," said Mary.

"Shut your heads and let Tom go on! What did he say, Tom?"

"He said--I THINK he said he hoped I was better off where I was gone
to, but if I'd been better sometimes--"

"THERE, d'you hear that! It was his very words!"

"And you shut him up sharp."

"I lay I did! There must 'a' been an angel there. There WAS an angel
there, somewheres!"

"And Mrs. Harper told about Joe scaring her with a firecracker, and
you told about Peter and the Painkiller--"

"Just as true as I live!"

"And then there was a whole lot of talk 'bout dragging the river for
us, and 'bout having the funeral Sunday, and then you and old Miss
Harper hugged and cried, and she went."

"It happened just so! It happened just so, as sure as I'm a-sitting in
these very tracks. Tom, you couldn't told it more like if you'd 'a'
seen it! And then what? Go on, Tom!"

"Then I thought you prayed for me--and I could see you and hear every
word you said. And you went to bed, and I was so sorry that I took and
wrote on a piece of sycamore bark, 'We ain't dead--we are only off
being pirates,' and put it on the table by the candle; and then you
looked so good, laying there asleep, that I thought I went and leaned
over and kissed you on the lips."

"Did you, Tom, DID you! I just forgive you everything for that!" And
she seized the boy in a crushing embrace that made him feel like the
guiltiest of villains.

"It was very kind, even though it was only a--dream," Sid soliloquized
just audibly.

"Shut up, Sid! A body does just the same in a dream as he'd do if he
was awake. Here's a big Milum apple I've been saving for you, Tom, if
you was ever found again--now go 'long to school. I'm thankful to the
good God and Father of us all I've got you back, that's long-suffering
and merciful to them that believe on Him and keep His word, though
goodness knows I'm unworthy of it, but if only the worthy ones got His
blessings and had His hand to help them over the rough places, there's
few enough would smile here or ever enter into His rest when the long
night comes. Go 'long Sid, Mary, Tom--take yourselves off--you've
hendered me long enough."

The children left for school, and the old lady to call on Mrs. Harper
and vanquish her realism with Tom's marvellous dream. Sid had better
judgment than to utter the thought that was in his mind as he left the
house. It was this: "Pretty thin--as long a dream as that, without any
mistakes in it!"

What a hero Tom was become, now! He did not go skipping and prancing,
but moved with a dignified swagger as became a pirate who felt that the
public eye was on him. And indeed it was; he tried not to seem to see
the looks or hear the remarks as he passed along, but they were food
and drink to him. Smaller boys than himself flocked at his heels, as
proud to be seen with him, and tolerated by him, as if he had been the
drummer at the head of a procession or the elephant leading a menagerie
into town. Boys of his own size pretended not to know he had been away
at all; but they were consuming with envy, nevertheless. They would
have given anything to have that swarthy suntanned skin of his, and his
glittering notoriety; and Tom would not have parted with either for a
circus.

At school the children made so much of him and of Joe, and delivered
such eloquent admiration from their eyes, that the two heroes were not
long in becoming insufferably "stuck-up." They began to tell their
adventures to hungry listeners--but they only began; it was not a thing
likely to have an end, with imaginations like theirs to furnish
material. And finally, when they got out their pipes and went serenely
puffing around, the very summit of glory was reached.

Tom decided that he could be independent of Becky Thatcher now. Glory
was sufficient. He would live for glory. Now that he was distinguished,
maybe she would be wanting to "make up." Well, let her--she should see
that he could be as indifferent as some other people. Presently she
arrived. Tom pretended not to see her. He moved away and joined a group
of boys and girls and began to talk. Soon he observed that she was
tripping gayly back and forth with flushed face and dancing eyes,
pretending to be busy chasing schoolmates, and screaming with laughter
when she made a capture; but he noticed that she always made her
captures in his vicinity, and that she seemed to cast a conscious eye
in his direction at such times, too. It gratified all the vicious
vanity that was in him; and so, instead of winning him, it only "set
him up" the more and made him the more diligent to avoid betraying that
he knew she was about. Presently she gave over skylarking, and moved
irresolutely about, sighing once or twice and glancing furtively and
wistfully toward Tom. Then she observed that now Tom was talking more
particularly to Amy Lawrence than to any one else. She felt a sharp
pang and grew disturbed and uneasy at once. She tried to go away, but
her feet were treacherous, and carried her to the group instead. She
said to a girl almost at Tom's elbow--with sham vivacity:

"Why, Mary Austin! you bad girl, why didn't you come to Sunday-school?"

"I did come--didn't you see me?"

"Why, no! Did you? Where did you sit?"

"I was in Miss Peters' class, where I always go. I saw YOU."

"Did you? Why, it's funny I didn't see you. I wanted to tell you about
the picnic."

"Oh, that's jolly. Who's going to give it?"

"My ma's going to let me have one."

"Oh, goody; I hope she'll let ME come."

"Well, she will. The picnic's for me. She'll let anybody come that I
want, and I want you."

"That's ever so nice. When is it going to be?"

"By and by. Maybe about vacation."

"Oh, won't it be fun! You going to have all the girls and boys?"

"Yes, every one that's friends to me--or wants to be"; and she glanced
ever so furtively at Tom, but he talked right along to Amy Lawrence
about the terrible storm on the island, and how the lightning tore the
great sycamore tree "all to flinders" while he was "standing within
three feet of it."

"Oh, may I come?" said Grace Miller.

"Yes."

"And me?" said Sally Rogers.

"Yes."

"And me, too?" said Susy Harper. "And Joe?"

"Yes."

And so on, with clapping of joyful hands till all the group had begged
for invitations but Tom and Amy. Then Tom turned coolly away, still
talking, and took Amy with him. Becky's lips trembled and the tears
came to her eyes; she hid these signs with a forced gayety and went on
chattering, but the life had gone out of the picnic, now, and out of
everything else; she got away as soon as she could and hid herself and
had what her sex call "a good cry." Then she sat moody, with wounded
pride, till the bell rang. She roused up, now, with a vindictive cast
in her eye, and gave her plaited tails a shake and said she knew what
SHE'D do.

At recess Tom continued his flirtation with Amy with jubilant
self-satisfaction. And he kept drifting about to find Becky and lacerate
her with the performance. At last he spied her, but there was a sudden
falling of his mercury. She was sitting cosily on a little bench behind
the schoolhouse looking at a picture-book with Alfred Temple--and so
absorbed were they, and their heads so close together over the book,
that they did not seem to be conscious of anything in the world besides.
Jealousy ran red-hot through Tom's veins. He began to hate himself for
throwing away the chance Becky had offered for a reconciliation. He
called himself a fool, and all the hard names he could think of. He
wanted to cry with vexation. Amy chatted happily along, as they walked,
for her heart was singing, but Tom's tongue had lost its function. He
did not hear what Amy was saying, and whenever she paused expectantly he
could only stammer an awkward assent, which was as often misplaced as
otherwise. He kept drifting to the rear of the schoolhouse, again and
again, to sear his eyeballs with the hateful spectacle there. He could
not help it. And it maddened him to see, as he thought he saw, that
Becky Thatcher never once suspected that he was even in the land of the
living. But she did see, nevertheless; and she knew she was winning her
fight, too, and was glad to see him suffer as she had suffered.

Amy's happy prattle became intolerable. Tom hinted at things he had to
attend to; things that must be done; and time was fleeting. But in
vain--the girl chirped on. Tom thought, "Oh, hang her, ain't I ever
going to get rid of her?" At last he must be attending to those
things--and she said artlessly that she would be "around" when school
let out. And he hastened away, hating her for it.

"Any other boy!" Tom thought, grating his teeth. "Any boy in the whole
town but that Saint Louis smarty that thinks he dresses so fine and is
aristocracy! Oh, all right, I licked you the first day you ever saw
this town, mister, and I'll lick you again! You just wait till I catch
you out! I'll just take and--"

And he went through the motions of thrashing an imaginary boy
--pummelling the air, and kicking and gouging. "Oh, you do, do you? You
holler 'nough, do you? Now, then, let that learn you!" And so the
imaginary flogging was finished to his satisfaction.

Tom fled home at noon. His conscience could not endure any more of
Amy's grateful happiness, and his jealousy could bear no more of the
other distress. Becky resumed her picture inspections with Alfred, but
as the minutes dragged along and no Tom came to suffer, her triumph
began to cloud and she lost interest; gravity and absent-mindedness
followed, and then melancholy; two or three times she pricked up her
ear at a footstep, but it was a false hope; no Tom came. At last she
grew entirely miserable and wished she hadn't carried it so far. When
poor Alfred, seeing that he was losing her, he did not know how, kept
exclaiming: "Oh, here's a jolly one! look at this!" she lost patience
at last, and said, "Oh, don't bother me! I don't care for them!" and
burst into tears, and got up and walked away.

Alfred dropped alongside and was going to try to comfort her, but she
said:

"Go away and leave me alone, can't you! I hate you!"

So the boy halted, wondering what he could have done--for she had said
she would look at pictures all through the nooning--and she walked on,
crying. Then Alfred went musing into the deserted schoolhouse. He was
humiliated and angry. He easily guessed his way to the truth--the girl
had simply made a convenience of him to vent her spite upon Tom Sawyer.
He was far from hating Tom the less when this thought occurred to him.
He wished there was some way to get that boy into trouble without much
risk to himself. Tom's spelling-book fell under his eye. Here was his
opportunity. He gratefully opened to the lesson for the afternoon and
poured ink upon the page.

Becky, glancing in at a window behind him at the moment, saw the act,
and moved on, without discovering herself. She started homeward, now,
intending to find Tom and tell him; Tom would be thankful and their
troubles would be healed. Before she was half way home, however, she
had changed her mind. The thought of Tom's treatment of her when she
was talking about her picnic came scorching back and filled her with
shame. She resolved to let him get whipped on the damaged
spelling-book's account, and to hate him forever, into the bargain.



CHAPTER XIX

TOM arrived at home in a dreary mood, and the first thing his aunt
said to him showed him that he had brought his sorrows to an
unpromising market:

"Tom, I've a notion to skin you alive!"

"Auntie, what have I done?"

"Well, you've done enough. Here I go over to Sereny Harper, like an
old softy, expecting I'm going to make her believe all that rubbage
about that dream, when lo and behold you she'd found out from Joe that
you was over here and heard all the talk we had that night. Tom, I
don't know what is to become of a boy that will act like that. It makes
me feel so bad to think you could let me go to Sereny Harper and make
such a fool of myself and never say a word."

This was a new aspect of the thing. His smartness of the morning had
seemed to Tom a good joke before, and very ingenious. It merely looked
mean and shabby now. He hung his head and could not think of anything
to say for a moment. Then he said:

"Auntie, I wish I hadn't done it--but I didn't think."

"Oh, child, you never think. You never think of anything but your own
selfishness. You could think to come all the way over here from
Jackson's Island in the night to laugh at our troubles, and you could
think to fool me with a lie about a dream; but you couldn't ever think
to pity us and save us from sorrow."

"Auntie, I know now it was mean, but I didn't mean to be mean. I
didn't, honest. And besides, I didn't come over here to laugh at you
that night."

"What did you come for, then?"

"It was to tell you not to be uneasy about us, because we hadn't got
drownded."

"Tom, Tom, I would be the thankfullest soul in this world if I could
believe you ever had as good a thought as that, but you know you never
did--and I know it, Tom."

"Indeed and 'deed I did, auntie--I wish I may never stir if I didn't."

"Oh, Tom, don't lie--don't do it. It only makes things a hundred times
worse."

"It ain't a lie, auntie; it's the truth. I wanted to keep you from
grieving--that was all that made me come."

"I'd give the whole world to believe that--it would cover up a power
of sins, Tom. I'd 'most be glad you'd run off and acted so bad. But it
ain't reasonable; because, why didn't you tell me, child?"

"Why, you see, when you got to talking about the funeral, I just got
all full of the idea of our coming and hiding in the church, and I
couldn't somehow bear to spoil it. So I just put the bark back in my
pocket and kept mum."

"What bark?"

"The bark I had wrote on to tell you we'd gone pirating. I wish, now,
you'd waked up when I kissed you--I do, honest."

The hard lines in his aunt's face relaxed and a sudden tenderness
dawned in her eyes.

"DID you kiss me, Tom?"

"Why, yes, I did."

"Are you sure you did, Tom?"

"Why, yes, I did, auntie--certain sure."

"What did you kiss me for, Tom?"

"Because I loved you so, and you laid there moaning and I was so sorry."

The words sounded like truth. The old lady could not hide a tremor in
her voice when she said:

"Kiss me again, Tom!--and be off with you to school, now, and don't
bother me any more."

The moment he was gone, she ran to a closet and got out the ruin of a
jacket which Tom had gone pirating in. Then she stopped, with it in her
hand, and said to herself:

"No, I don't dare. Poor boy, I reckon he's lied about it--but it's a
blessed, blessed lie, there's such a comfort come from it. I hope the
Lord--I KNOW the Lord will forgive him, because it was such
goodheartedness in him to tell it. But I don't want to find out it's a
lie. I won't look."

She put the jacket away, and stood by musing a minute. Twice she put
out her hand to take the garment again, and twice she refrained. Once
more she ventured, and this time she fortified herself with the
thought: "It's a good lie--it's a good lie--I won't let it grieve me."
So she sought the jacket pocket. A moment later she was reading Tom's
piece of bark through flowing tears and saying: "I could forgive the
boy, now, if he'd committed a million sins!"



CHAPTER XX

THERE was something about Aunt Polly's manner, when she kissed Tom,
that swept away his low spirits and made him lighthearted and happy
again. He started to school and had the luck of coming upon Becky
Thatcher at the head of Meadow Lane. His mood always determined his
manner. Without a moment's hesitation he ran to her and said:

"I acted mighty mean to-day, Becky, and I'm so sorry. I won't ever,
ever do that way again, as long as ever I live--please make up, won't
you?"

The girl stopped and looked him scornfully in the face:

"I'll thank you to keep yourself TO yourself, Mr. Thomas Sawyer. I'll
never speak to you again."

She tossed her head and passed on. Tom was so stunned that he had not
even presence of mind enough to say "Who cares, Miss Smarty?" until the
right time to say it had gone by. So he said nothing. But he was in a
fine rage, nevertheless. He moped into the schoolyard wishing she were
a boy, and imagining how he would trounce her if she were. He presently
encountered her and delivered a stinging remark as he passed. She
hurled one in return, and the angry breach was complete. It seemed to
Becky, in her hot resentment, that she could hardly wait for school to
"take in," she was so impatient to see Tom flogged for the injured
spelling-book. If she had had any lingering notion of exposing Alfred
Temple, Tom's offensive fling had driven it entirely away.

Poor girl, she did not know how fast she was nearing trouble herself.
The master, Mr. Dobbins, had reached middle age with an unsatisfied
ambition. The darling of his desires was, to be a doctor, but poverty
had decreed that he should be nothing higher than a village
schoolmaster. Every day he took a mysterious book out of his desk and
absorbed himself in it at times when no classes were reciting. He kept
that book under lock and key. There was not an urchin in school but was
perishing to have a glimpse of it, but the chance never came. Every boy
and girl had a theory about the nature of that book; but no two
theories were alike, and there was no way of getting at the facts in
the case. Now, as Becky was passing by the desk, which stood near the
door, she noticed that the key was in the lock! It was a precious
moment. She glanced around; found herself alone, and the next instant
she had the book in her hands. The title-page--Professor Somebody's
ANATOMY--carried no information to her mind; so she began to turn the
leaves. She came at once upon a handsomely engraved and colored
frontispiece--a human figure, stark naked. At that moment a shadow fell
on the page and Tom Sawyer stepped in at the door and caught a glimpse
of the picture. Becky snatched at the book to close it, and had the
hard luck to tear the pictured page half down the middle. She thrust
the volume into the desk, turned the key, and burst out crying with
shame and vexation.

"Tom Sawyer, you are just as mean as you can be, to sneak up on a
person and look at what they're looking at."

"How could I know you was looking at anything?"

"You ought to be ashamed of yourself, Tom Sawyer; you know you're
going to tell on me, and oh, what shall I do, what shall I do! I'll be
whipped, and I never was whipped in school."

Then she stamped her little foot and said:

"BE so mean if you want to! I know something that's going to happen.
You just wait and you'll see! Hateful, hateful, hateful!"--and she
flung out of the house with a new explosion of crying.

Tom stood still, rather flustered by this onslaught. Presently he said
to himself:

"What a curious kind of a fool a girl is! Never been licked in school!
Shucks! What's a licking! That's just like a girl--they're so
thin-skinned and chicken-hearted. Well, of course I ain't going to tell
old Dobbins on this little fool, because there's other ways of getting
even on her, that ain't so mean; but what of it? Old Dobbins will ask
who it was tore his book. Nobody'll answer. Then he'll do just the way
he always does--ask first one and then t'other, and when he comes to the
right girl he'll know it, without any telling. Girls' faces always tell
on them. They ain't got any backbone. She'll get licked. Well, it's a
kind of a tight place for Becky Thatcher, because there ain't any way
out of it." Tom conned the thing a moment longer, and then added: "All
right, though; she'd like to see me in just such a fix--let her sweat it
out!"

Tom joined the mob of skylarking scholars outside. In a few moments
the master arrived and school "took in." Tom did not feel a strong
interest in his studies. Every time he stole a glance at the girls'
side of the room Becky's face troubled him. Considering all things, he
did not want to pity her, and yet it was all he could do to help it. He
could get up no exultation that was really worthy the name. Presently
the spelling-book discovery was made, and Tom's mind was entirely full
of his own matters for a while after that. Becky roused up from her
lethargy of distress and showed good interest in the proceedings. She
did not expect that Tom could get out of his trouble by denying that he
spilt the ink on the book himself; and she was right. The denial only
seemed to make the thing worse for Tom. Becky supposed she would be
glad of that, and she tried to believe she was glad of it, but she
found she was not certain. When the worst came to the worst, she had an
impulse to get up and tell on Alfred Temple, but she made an effort and
forced herself to keep still--because, said she to herself, "he'll tell
about me tearing the picture sure. I wouldn't say a word, not to save
his life!"

Tom took his whipping and went back to his seat not at all
broken-hearted, for he thought it was possible that he had unknowingly
upset the ink on the spelling-book himself, in some skylarking bout--he
had denied it for form's sake and because it was custom, and had stuck
to the denial from principle.

A whole hour drifted by, the master sat nodding in his throne, the air
was drowsy with the hum of study. By and by, Mr. Dobbins straightened
himself up, yawned, then unlocked his desk, and reached for his book,
but seemed undecided whether to take it out or leave it. Most of the
pupils glanced up languidly, but there were two among them that watched
his movements with intent eyes. Mr. Dobbins fingered his book absently
for a while, then took it out and settled himself in his chair to read!
Tom shot a glance at Becky. He had seen a hunted and helpless rabbit
look as she did, with a gun levelled at its head. Instantly he forgot
his quarrel with her. Quick--something must be done! done in a flash,
too! But the very imminence of the emergency paralyzed his invention.
Good!--he had an inspiration! He would run and snatch the book, spring
through the door and fly. But his resolution shook for one little
instant, and the chance was lost--the master opened the volume. If Tom
only had the wasted opportunity back again! Too late. There was no help
for Becky now, he said. The next moment the master faced the school.
Every eye sank under his gaze. There was that in it which smote even
the innocent with fear. There was silence while one might count ten
--the master was gathering his wrath. Then he spoke: "Who tore this book?"

There was not a sound. One could have heard a pin drop. The stillness
continued; the master searched face after face for signs of guilt.

"Benjamin Rogers, did you tear this book?"

A denial. Another pause.

"Joseph Harper, did you?"

Another denial. Tom's uneasiness grew more and more intense under the
slow torture of these proceedings. The master scanned the ranks of
boys--considered a while, then turned to the girls:

"Amy Lawrence?"

A shake of the head.

"Gracie Miller?"

The same sign.

"Susan Harper, did you do this?"

Another negative. The next girl was Becky Thatcher. Tom was trembling
from head to foot with excitement and a sense of the hopelessness of
the situation.

"Rebecca Thatcher" [Tom glanced at her face--it was white with terror]
--"did you tear--no, look me in the face" [her hands rose in appeal]
--"did you tear this book?"

A thought shot like lightning through Tom's brain. He sprang to his
feet and shouted--"I done it!"

The school stared in perplexity at this incredible folly. Tom stood a
moment, to gather his dismembered faculties; and when he stepped
forward to go to his punishment the surprise, the gratitude, the
adoration that shone upon him out of poor Becky's eyes seemed pay
enough for a hundred floggings. Inspired by the splendor of his own
act, he took without an outcry the most merciless flaying that even Mr.
Dobbins had ever administered; and also received with indifference the
added cruelty of a command to remain two hours after school should be
dismissed--for he knew who would wait for him outside till his
captivity was done, and not count the tedious time as loss, either.

Tom went to bed that night planning vengeance against Alfred Temple;
for with shame and repentance Becky had told him all, not forgetting
her own treachery; but even the longing for vengeance had to give way,
soon, to pleasanter musings, and he fell asleep at last with Becky's
latest words lingering dreamily in his ear--

"Tom, how COULD you be so noble!"



CHAPTER XXI

VACATION was approaching. The schoolmaster, always severe, grew
severer and more exacting than ever, for he wanted the school to make a
good showing on "Examination" day. His rod and his ferule were seldom
idle now--at least among the smaller pupils. Only the biggest boys, and
young ladies of eighteen and twenty, escaped lashing. Mr. Dobbins'
lashings were very vigorous ones, too; for although he carried, under
his wig, a perfectly bald and shiny head, he had only reached middle
age, and there was no sign of feebleness in his muscle. As the great
day approached, all the tyranny that was in him came to the surface; he
seemed to take a vindictive pleasure in punishing the least
shortcomings. The consequence was, that the smaller boys spent their
days in terror and suffering and their nights in plotting revenge. They
threw away no opportunity to do the master a mischief. But he kept
ahead all the time. The retribution that followed every vengeful
success was so sweeping and majestic that the boys always retired from
the field badly worsted. At last they conspired together and hit upon a
plan that promised a dazzling victory. They swore in the sign-painter's
boy, told him the scheme, and asked his help. He had his own reasons
for being delighted, for the master boarded in his father's family and
had given the boy ample cause to hate him. The master's wife would go
on a visit to the country in a few days, and there would be nothing to
interfere with the plan; the master always prepared himself for great
occasions by getting pretty well fuddled, and the sign-painter's boy
said that when the dominie had reached the proper condition on
Examination Evening he would "manage the thing" while he napped in his
chair; then he would have him awakened at the right time and hurried
away to school.

In the fulness of time the interesting occasion arrived. At eight in
the evening the schoolhouse was brilliantly lighted, and adorned with
wreaths and festoons of foliage and flowers. The master sat throned in
his great chair upon a raised platform, with his blackboard behind him.
He was looking tolerably mellow. Three rows of benches on each side and
six rows in front of him were occupied by the dignitaries of the town
and by the parents of the pupils. To his left, back of the rows of
citizens, was a spacious temporary platform upon which were seated the
scholars who were to take part in the exercises of the evening; rows of
small boys, washed and dressed to an intolerable state of discomfort;
rows of gawky big boys; snowbanks of girls and young ladies clad in
lawn and muslin and conspicuously conscious of their bare arms, their
grandmothers' ancient trinkets, their bits of pink and blue ribbon and
the flowers in their hair. All the rest of the house was filled with
non-participating scholars.

The exercises began. A very little boy stood up and sheepishly
recited, "You'd scarce expect one of my age to speak in public on the
stage," etc.--accompanying himself with the painfully exact and
spasmodic gestures which a machine might have used--supposing the
machine to be a trifle out of order. But he got through safely, though
cruelly scared, and got a fine round of applause when he made his
manufactured bow and retired.

A little shamefaced girl lisped, "Mary had a little lamb," etc.,
performed a compassion-inspiring curtsy, got her meed of applause, and
sat down flushed and happy.

Tom Sawyer stepped forward with conceited confidence and soared into
the unquenchable and indestructible "Give me liberty or give me death"
speech, with fine fury and frantic gesticulation, and broke down in the
middle of it. A ghastly stage-fright seized him, his legs quaked under
him and he was like to choke. True, he had the manifest sympathy of the
house but he had the house's silence, too, which was even worse than
its sympathy. The master frowned, and this completed the disaster. Tom
struggled awhile and then retired, utterly defeated. There was a weak
attempt at applause, but it died early.

"The Boy Stood on the Burning Deck" followed; also "The Assyrian Came
Down," and other declamatory gems. Then there were reading exercises,
and a spelling fight. The meagre Latin class recited with honor. The
prime feature of the evening was in order, now--original "compositions"
by the young ladies. Each in her turn stepped forward to the edge of
the platform, cleared her throat, held up her manuscript (tied with
dainty ribbon), and proceeded to read, with labored attention to
"expression" and punctuation. The themes were the same that had been
illuminated upon similar occasions by their mothers before them, their
grandmothers, and doubtless all their ancestors in the female line
clear back to the Crusades. "Friendship" was one; "Memories of Other
Days"; "Religion in History"; "Dream Land"; "The Advantages of
Culture"; "Forms of Political Government Compared and Contrasted";
"Melancholy"; "Filial Love"; "Heart Longings," etc., etc.

A prevalent feature in these compositions was a nursed and petted
melancholy; another was a wasteful and opulent gush of "fine language";
another was a tendency to lug in by the ears particularly prized words
and phrases until they were worn entirely out; and a peculiarity that
conspicuously marked and marred them was the inveterate and intolerable
sermon that wagged its crippled tail at the end of each and every one
of them. No matter what the subject might be, a brain-racking effort
was made to squirm it into some aspect or other that the moral and
religious mind could contemplate with edification. The glaring
insincerity of these sermons was not sufficient to compass the
banishment of the fashion from the schools, and it is not sufficient
to-day; it never will be sufficient while the world stands, perhaps.
There is no school in all our land where the young ladies do not feel
obliged to close their compositions with a sermon; and you will find
that the sermon of the most frivolous and the least religious girl in
the school is always the longest and the most relentlessly pious. But
enough of this. Homely truth is unpalatable.

Let us return to the "Examination." The first composition that was
read was one entitled "Is this, then, Life?" Perhaps the reader can
endure an extract from it:

  "In the common walks of life, with what delightful
   emotions does the youthful mind look forward to some
   anticipated scene of festivity! Imagination is busy
   sketching rose-tinted pictures of joy. In fancy, the
   voluptuous votary of fashion sees herself amid the
   festive throng, 'the observed of all observers.' Her
   graceful form, arrayed in snowy robes, is whirling
   through the mazes of the joyous dance; her eye is
   brightest, her step is lightest in the gay assembly.

  "In such delicious fancies time quickly glides by,
   and the welcome hour arrives for her entrance into
   the Elysian world, of which she has had such bright
   dreams. How fairy-like does everything appear to
   her enchanted vision! Each new scene is more charming
   than the last. But after a while she finds that
   beneath this goodly exterior, all is vanity, the
   flattery which once charmed her soul, now grates
   harshly upon her ear; the ball-room has lost its
   charms; and with wasted health and imbittered heart,
   she turns away with the conviction that earthly
   pleasures cannot satisfy the longings of the soul!"

And so forth and so on. There was a buzz of gratification from time to
time during the reading, accompanied by whispered ejaculations of "How
sweet!" "How eloquent!" "So true!" etc., and after the thing had closed
with a peculiarly afflicting sermon the applause was enthusiastic.

Then arose a slim, melancholy girl, whose face had the "interesting"
paleness that comes of pills and indigestion, and read a "poem." Two
stanzas of it will do:

   "A MISSOURI MAIDEN'S FAREWELL TO ALABAMA

   "Alabama, good-bye! I love thee well!
      But yet for a while do I leave thee now!
    Sad, yes, sad thoughts of thee my heart doth swell,
      And burning recollections throng my brow!
    For I have wandered through thy flowery woods;
      Have roamed and read near Tallapoosa's stream;
    Have listened to Tallassee's warring floods,
      And wooed on Coosa's side Aurora's beam.

   "Yet shame I not to bear an o'er-full heart,
      Nor blush to turn behind my tearful eyes;
    'Tis from no stranger land I now must part,
      'Tis to no strangers left I yield these sighs.
    Welcome and home were mine within this State,
      Whose vales I leave--whose spires fade fast from me
    And cold must be mine eyes, and heart, and tete,
      When, dear Alabama! they turn cold on thee!"

There were very few there who knew what "tete" meant, but the poem was
very satisfactory, nevertheless.

Next appeared a dark-complexioned, black-eyed, black-haired young
lady, who paused an impressive moment, assumed a tragic expression, and
began to read in a measured, solemn tone:

  "A VISION

   "Dark and tempestuous was night. Around the
   throne on high not a single star quivered; but
   the deep intonations of the heavy thunder
   constantly vibrated upon the ear; whilst the
   terrific lightning revelled in angry mood
   through the cloudy chambers of heaven, seeming
   to scorn the power exerted over its terror by
   the illustrious Franklin! Even the boisterous
   winds unanimously came forth from their mystic
   homes, and blustered about as if to enhance by
   their aid the wildness of the scene.

   "At such a time, so dark, so dreary, for human
   sympathy my very spirit sighed; but instead thereof,

   "'My dearest friend, my counsellor, my comforter
   and guide--My joy in grief, my second bliss
   in joy,' came to my side. She moved like one of
   those bright beings pictured in the sunny walks
   of fancy's Eden by the romantic and young, a
   queen of beauty unadorned save by her own
   transcendent loveliness. So soft was her step, it
   failed to make even a sound, and but for the
   magical thrill imparted by her genial touch, as
   other unobtrusive beauties, she would have glided
   away un-perceived--unsought. A strange sadness
   rested upon her features, like icy tears upon
   the robe of December, as she pointed to the
   contending elements without, and bade me contemplate
   the two beings presented."

This nightmare occupied some ten pages of manuscript and wound up with
a sermon so destructive of all hope to non-Presbyterians that it took
the first prize. This composition was considered to be the very finest
effort of the evening. The mayor of the village, in delivering the
prize to the author of it, made a warm speech in which he said that it
was by far the most "eloquent" thing he had ever listened to, and that
Daniel Webster himself might well be proud of it.

It may be remarked, in passing, that the number of compositions in
which the word "beauteous" was over-fondled, and human experience
referred to as "life's page," was up to the usual average.

Now the master, mellow almost to the verge of geniality, put his chair
aside, turned his back to the audience, and began to draw a map of
America on the blackboard, to exercise the geography class upon. But he
made a sad business of it with his unsteady hand, and a smothered
titter rippled over the house. He knew what the matter was, and set
himself to right it. He sponged out lines and remade them; but he only
distorted them more than ever, and the tittering was more pronounced.
He threw his entire attention upon his work, now, as if determined not
to be put down by the mirth. He felt that all eyes were fastened upon
him; he imagined he was succeeding, and yet the tittering continued; it
even manifestly increased. And well it might. There was a garret above,
pierced with a scuttle over his head; and down through this scuttle
came a cat, suspended around the haunches by a string; she had a rag
tied about her head and jaws to keep her from mewing; as she slowly
descended she curved upward and clawed at the string, she swung
downward and clawed at the intangible air. The tittering rose higher
and higher--the cat was within six inches of the absorbed teacher's
head--down, down, a little lower, and she grabbed his wig with her
desperate claws, clung to it, and was snatched up into the garret in an
instant with her trophy still in her possession! And how the light did
blaze abroad from the master's bald pate--for the sign-painter's boy
had GILDED it!

That broke up the meeting. The boys were avenged. Vacation had come.

   NOTE:--The pretended "compositions" quoted in
   this chapter are taken without alteration from a
   volume entitled "Prose and Poetry, by a Western
   Lady"--but they are exactly and precisely after
   the schoolgirl pattern, and hence are much
   happier than any mere imitations could be.



CHAPTER XXII

TOM joined the new order of Cadets of Temperance, being attracted by
the showy character of their "regalia." He promised to abstain from
smoking, chewing, and profanity as long as he remained a member. Now he
found out a new thing--namely, that to promise not to do a thing is the
surest way in the world to make a body want to go and do that very
thing. Tom soon found himself tormented with a desire to drink and
swear; the desire grew to be so intense that nothing but the hope of a
chance to display himself in his red sash kept him from withdrawing
from the order. Fourth of July was coming; but he soon gave that up
--gave it up before he had worn his shackles over forty-eight hours--and
fixed his hopes upon old Judge Frazer, justice of the peace, who was
apparently on his deathbed and would have a big public funeral, since
he was so high an official. During three days Tom was deeply concerned
about the Judge's condition and hungry for news of it. Sometimes his
hopes ran high--so high that he would venture to get out his regalia
and practise before the looking-glass. But the Judge had a most
discouraging way of fluctuating. At last he was pronounced upon the
mend--and then convalescent. Tom was disgusted; and felt a sense of
injury, too. He handed in his resignation at once--and that night the
Judge suffered a relapse and died. Tom resolved that he would never
trust a man like that again.

The funeral was a fine thing. The Cadets paraded in a style calculated
to kill the late member with envy. Tom was a free boy again, however
--there was something in that. He could drink and swear, now--but found
to his surprise that he did not want to. The simple fact that he could,
took the desire away, and the charm of it.

Tom presently wondered to find that his coveted vacation was beginning
to hang a little heavily on his hands.

He attempted a diary--but nothing happened during three days, and so
he abandoned it.

The first of all the negro minstrel shows came to town, and made a
sensation. Tom and Joe Harper got up a band of performers and were
happy for two days.

Even the Glorious Fourth was in some sense a failure, for it rained
hard, there was no procession in consequence, and the greatest man in
the world (as Tom supposed), Mr. Benton, an actual United States
Senator, proved an overwhelming disappointment--for he was not
twenty-five feet high, nor even anywhere in the neighborhood of it.

A circus came. The boys played circus for three days afterward in
tents made of rag carpeting--admission, three pins for boys, two for
girls--and then circusing was abandoned.

A phrenologist and a mesmerizer came--and went again and left the
village duller and drearier than ever.

There were some boys-and-girls' parties, but they were so few and so
delightful that they only made the aching voids between ache the harder.

Becky Thatcher was gone to her Constantinople home to stay with her
parents during vacation--so there was no bright side to life anywhere.

The dreadful secret of the murder was a chronic misery. It was a very
cancer for permanency and pain.

Then came the measles.

During two long weeks Tom lay a prisoner, dead to the world and its
happenings. He was very ill, he was interested in nothing. When he got
upon his feet at last and moved feebly down-town, a melancholy change
had come over everything and every creature. There had been a
"revival," and everybody had "got religion," not only the adults, but
even the boys and girls. Tom went about, hoping against hope for the
sight of one blessed sinful face, but disappointment crossed him
everywhere. He found Joe Harper studying a Testament, and turned sadly
away from the depressing spectacle. He sought Ben Rogers, and found him
visiting the poor with a basket of tracts. He hunted up Jim Hollis, who
called his attention to the precious blessing of his late measles as a
warning. Every boy he encountered added another ton to his depression;
and when, in desperation, he flew for refuge at last to the bosom of
Huckleberry Finn and was received with a Scriptural quotation, his
heart broke and he crept home and to bed realizing that he alone of all
the town was lost, forever and forever.

And that night there came on a terrific storm, with driving rain,
awful claps of thunder and blinding sheets of lightning. He covered his
head with the bedclothes and waited in a horror of suspense for his
doom; for he had not the shadow of a doubt that all this hubbub was
about him. He believed he had taxed the forbearance of the powers above
to the extremity of endurance and that this was the result. It might
have seemed to him a waste of pomp and ammunition to kill a bug with a
battery of artillery, but there seemed nothing incongruous about the
getting up such an expensive thunderstorm as this to knock the turf
from under an insect like himself.

By and by the tempest spent itself and died without accomplishing its
object. The boy's first impulse was to be grateful, and reform. His
second was to wait--for there might not be any more storms.

The next day the doctors were back; Tom had relapsed. The three weeks
he spent on his back this time seemed an entire age. When he got abroad
at last he was hardly grateful that he had been spared, remembering how
lonely was his estate, how companionless and forlorn he was. He drifted
listlessly down the street and found Jim Hollis acting as judge in a
juvenile court that was trying a cat for murder, in the presence of her
victim, a bird. He found Joe Harper and Huck Finn up an alley eating a
stolen melon. Poor lads! they--like Tom--had suffered a relapse.



CHAPTER XXIII

AT last the sleepy atmosphere was stirred--and vigorously: the murder
trial came on in the court. It became the absorbing topic of village
talk immediately. Tom could not get away from it. Every reference to
the murder sent a shudder to his heart, for his troubled conscience and
fears almost persuaded him that these remarks were put forth in his
hearing as "feelers"; he did not see how he could be suspected of
knowing anything about the murder, but still he could not be
comfortable in the midst of this gossip. It kept him in a cold shiver
all the time. He took Huck to a lonely place to have a talk with him.
It would be some relief to unseal his tongue for a little while; to
divide his burden of distress with another sufferer. Moreover, he
wanted to assure himself that Huck had remained discreet.

"Huck, have you ever told anybody about--that?"

"'Bout what?"

"You know what."

"Oh--'course I haven't."

"Never a word?"

"Never a solitary word, so help me. What makes you ask?"

"Well, I was afeard."

"Why, Tom Sawyer, we wouldn't be alive two days if that got found out.
YOU know that."

Tom felt more comfortable. After a pause:

"Huck, they couldn't anybody get you to tell, could they?"

"Get me to tell? Why, if I wanted that half-breed devil to drownd me
they could get me to tell. They ain't no different way."

"Well, that's all right, then. I reckon we're safe as long as we keep
mum. But let's swear again, anyway. It's more surer."

"I'm agreed."

So they swore again with dread solemnities.

"What is the talk around, Huck? I've heard a power of it."

"Talk? Well, it's just Muff Potter, Muff Potter, Muff Potter all the
time. It keeps me in a sweat, constant, so's I want to hide som'ers."

"That's just the same way they go on round me. I reckon he's a goner.
Don't you feel sorry for him, sometimes?"

"Most always--most always. He ain't no account; but then he hain't
ever done anything to hurt anybody. Just fishes a little, to get money
to get drunk on--and loafs around considerable; but lord, we all do
that--leastways most of us--preachers and such like. But he's kind of
good--he give me half a fish, once, when there warn't enough for two;
and lots of times he's kind of stood by me when I was out of luck."

"Well, he's mended kites for me, Huck, and knitted hooks on to my
line. I wish we could get him out of there."

"My! we couldn't get him out, Tom. And besides, 'twouldn't do any
good; they'd ketch him again."

"Yes--so they would. But I hate to hear 'em abuse him so like the
dickens when he never done--that."

"I do too, Tom. Lord, I hear 'em say he's the bloodiest looking
villain in this country, and they wonder he wasn't ever hung before."

"Yes, they talk like that, all the time. I've heard 'em say that if he
was to get free they'd lynch him."

"And they'd do it, too."

The boys had a long talk, but it brought them little comfort. As the
twilight drew on, they found themselves hanging about the neighborhood
of the little isolated jail, perhaps with an undefined hope that
something would happen that might clear away their difficulties. But
nothing happened; there seemed to be no angels or fairies interested in
this luckless captive.

The boys did as they had often done before--went to the cell grating
and gave Potter some tobacco and matches. He was on the ground floor
and there were no guards.

His gratitude for their gifts had always smote their consciences
before--it cut deeper than ever, this time. They felt cowardly and
treacherous to the last degree when Potter said:

"You've been mighty good to me, boys--better'n anybody else in this
town. And I don't forget it, I don't. Often I says to myself, says I,
'I used to mend all the boys' kites and things, and show 'em where the
good fishin' places was, and befriend 'em what I could, and now they've
all forgot old Muff when he's in trouble; but Tom don't, and Huck
don't--THEY don't forget him, says I, 'and I don't forget them.' Well,
boys, I done an awful thing--drunk and crazy at the time--that's the
only way I account for it--and now I got to swing for it, and it's
right. Right, and BEST, too, I reckon--hope so, anyway. Well, we won't
talk about that. I don't want to make YOU feel bad; you've befriended
me. But what I want to say, is, don't YOU ever get drunk--then you won't
ever get here. Stand a litter furder west--so--that's it; it's a prime
comfort to see faces that's friendly when a body's in such a muck of
trouble, and there don't none come here but yourn. Good friendly
faces--good friendly faces. Git up on one another's backs and let me
touch 'em. That's it. Shake hands--yourn'll come through the bars, but
mine's too big. Little hands, and weak--but they've helped Muff Potter
a power, and they'd help him more if they could."

Tom went home miserable, and his dreams that night were full of
horrors. The next day and the day after, he hung about the court-room,
drawn by an almost irresistible impulse to go in, but forcing himself
to stay out. Huck was having the same experience. They studiously
avoided each other. Each wandered away, from time to time, but the same
dismal fascination always brought them back presently. Tom kept his
ears open when idlers sauntered out of the court-room, but invariably
heard distressing news--the toils were closing more and more
relentlessly around poor Potter. At the end of the second day the
village talk was to the effect that Injun Joe's evidence stood firm and
unshaken, and that there was not the slightest question as to what the
jury's verdict would be.

Tom was out late, that night, and came to bed through the window. He
was in a tremendous state of excitement. It was hours before he got to
sleep. All the village flocked to the court-house the next morning, for
this was to be the great day. Both sexes were about equally represented
in the packed audience. After a long wait the jury filed in and took
their places; shortly afterward, Potter, pale and haggard, timid and
hopeless, was brought in, with chains upon him, and seated where all
the curious eyes could stare at him; no less conspicuous was Injun Joe,
stolid as ever. There was another pause, and then the judge arrived and
the sheriff proclaimed the opening of the court. The usual whisperings
among the lawyers and gathering together of papers followed. These
details and accompanying delays worked up an atmosphere of preparation
that was as impressive as it was fascinating.

Now a witness was called who testified that he found Muff Potter
washing in the brook, at an early hour of the morning that the murder
was discovered, and that he immediately sneaked away. After some
further questioning, counsel for the prosecution said:

"Take the witness."

The prisoner raised his eyes for a moment, but dropped them again when
his own counsel said:

"I have no questions to ask him."

The next witness proved the finding of the knife near the corpse.
Counsel for the prosecution said:

"Take the witness."

"I have no questions to ask him," Potter's lawyer replied.

A third witness swore he had often seen the knife in Potter's
possession.

"Take the witness."

Counsel for Potter declined to question him. The faces of the audience
began to betray annoyance. Did this attorney mean to throw away his
client's life without an effort?

Several witnesses deposed concerning Potter's guilty behavior when
brought to the scene of the murder. They were allowed to leave the
stand without being cross-questioned.

Every detail of the damaging circumstances that occurred in the
graveyard upon that morning which all present remembered so well was
brought out by credible witnesses, but none of them were cross-examined
by Potter's lawyer. The perplexity and dissatisfaction of the house
expressed itself in murmurs and provoked a reproof from the bench.
Counsel for the prosecution now said:

"By the oaths of citizens whose simple word is above suspicion, we
have fastened this awful crime, beyond all possibility of question,
upon the unhappy prisoner at the bar. We rest our case here."

A groan escaped from poor Potter, and he put his face in his hands and
rocked his body softly to and fro, while a painful silence reigned in
the court-room. Many men were moved, and many women's compassion
testified itself in tears. Counsel for the defence rose and said:

"Your honor, in our remarks at the opening of this trial, we
foreshadowed our purpose to prove that our client did this fearful deed
while under the influence of a blind and irresponsible delirium
produced by drink. We have changed our mind. We shall not offer that
plea." [Then to the clerk:] "Call Thomas Sawyer!"

A puzzled amazement awoke in every face in the house, not even
excepting Potter's. Every eye fastened itself with wondering interest
upon Tom as he rose and took his place upon the stand. The boy looked
wild enough, for he was badly scared. The oath was administered.

"Thomas Sawyer, where were you on the seventeenth of June, about the
hour of midnight?"

Tom glanced at Injun Joe's iron face and his tongue failed him. The
audience listened breathless, but the words refused to come. After a
few moments, however, the boy got a little of his strength back, and
managed to put enough of it into his voice to make part of the house
hear:

"In the graveyard!"

"A little bit louder, please. Don't be afraid. You were--"

"In the graveyard."

A contemptuous smile flitted across Injun Joe's face.

"Were you anywhere near Horse Williams' grave?"

"Yes, sir."

"Speak up--just a trifle louder. How near were you?"

"Near as I am to you."

"Were you hidden, or not?"

"I was hid."

"Where?"

"Behind the elms that's on the edge of the grave."

Injun Joe gave a barely perceptible start.

"Any one with you?"

"Yes, sir. I went there with--"

"Wait--wait a moment. Never mind mentioning your companion's name. We
will produce him at the proper time. Did you carry anything there with
you."

Tom hesitated and looked confused.

"Speak out, my boy--don't be diffident. The truth is always
respectable. What did you take there?"

"Only a--a--dead cat."

There was a ripple of mirth, which the court checked.

"We will produce the skeleton of that cat. Now, my boy, tell us
everything that occurred--tell it in your own way--don't skip anything,
and don't be afraid."

Tom began--hesitatingly at first, but as he warmed to his subject his
words flowed more and more easily; in a little while every sound ceased
but his own voice; every eye fixed itself upon him; with parted lips
and bated breath the audience hung upon his words, taking no note of
time, rapt in the ghastly fascinations of the tale. The strain upon
pent emotion reached its climax when the boy said:

"--and as the doctor fetched the board around and Muff Potter fell,
Injun Joe jumped with the knife and--"

Crash! Quick as lightning the half-breed sprang for a window, tore his
way through all opposers, and was gone!



CHAPTER XXIV

TOM was a glittering hero once more--the pet of the old, the envy of
the young. His name even went into immortal print, for the village
paper magnified him. There were some that believed he would be
President, yet, if he escaped hanging.

As usual, the fickle, unreasoning world took Muff Potter to its bosom
and fondled him as lavishly as it had abused him before. But that sort
of conduct is to the world's credit; therefore it is not well to find
fault with it.

Tom's days were days of splendor and exultation to him, but his nights
were seasons of horror. Injun Joe infested all his dreams, and always
with doom in his eye. Hardly any temptation could persuade the boy to
stir abroad after nightfall. Poor Huck was in the same state of
wretchedness and terror, for Tom had told the whole story to the lawyer
the night before the great day of the trial, and Huck was sore afraid
that his share in the business might leak out, yet, notwithstanding
Injun Joe's flight had saved him the suffering of testifying in court.
The poor fellow had got the attorney to promise secrecy, but what of
that? Since Tom's harassed conscience had managed to drive him to the
lawyer's house by night and wring a dread tale from lips that had been
sealed with the dismalest and most formidable of oaths, Huck's
confidence in the human race was well-nigh obliterated.

Daily Muff Potter's gratitude made Tom glad he had spoken; but nightly
he wished he had sealed up his tongue.

Half the time Tom was afraid Injun Joe would never be captured; the
other half he was afraid he would be. He felt sure he never could draw
a safe breath again until that man was dead and he had seen the corpse.

Rewards had been offered, the country had been scoured, but no Injun
Joe was found. One of those omniscient and awe-inspiring marvels, a
detective, came up from St. Louis, moused around, shook his head,
looked wise, and made that sort of astounding success which members of
that craft usually achieve. That is to say, he "found a clew." But you
can't hang a "clew" for murder, and so after that detective had got
through and gone home, Tom felt just as insecure as he was before.

The slow days drifted on, and each left behind it a slightly lightened
weight of apprehension.



CHAPTER XXV

THERE comes a time in every rightly-constructed boy's life when he has
a raging desire to go somewhere and dig for hidden treasure. This
desire suddenly came upon Tom one day. He sallied out to find Joe
Harper, but failed of success. Next he sought Ben Rogers; he had gone
fishing. Presently he stumbled upon Huck Finn the Red-Handed. Huck
would answer. Tom took him to a private place and opened the matter to
him confidentially. Huck was willing. Huck was always willing to take a
hand in any enterprise that offered entertainment and required no
capital, for he had a troublesome superabundance of that sort of time
which is not money. "Where'll we dig?" said Huck.

"Oh, most anywhere."

"Why, is it hid all around?"

"No, indeed it ain't. It's hid in mighty particular places, Huck
--sometimes on islands, sometimes in rotten chests under the end of a
limb of an old dead tree, just where the shadow falls at midnight; but
mostly under the floor in ha'nted houses."

"Who hides it?"

"Why, robbers, of course--who'd you reckon? Sunday-school
sup'rintendents?"

"I don't know. If 'twas mine I wouldn't hide it; I'd spend it and have
a good time."

"So would I. But robbers don't do that way. They always hide it and
leave it there."

"Don't they come after it any more?"

"No, they think they will, but they generally forget the marks, or
else they die. Anyway, it lays there a long time and gets rusty; and by
and by somebody finds an old yellow paper that tells how to find the
marks--a paper that's got to be ciphered over about a week because it's
mostly signs and hy'roglyphics."

"HyroQwhich?"

"Hy'roglyphics--pictures and things, you know, that don't seem to mean
anything."

"Have you got one of them papers, Tom?"

"No."

"Well then, how you going to find the marks?"

"I don't want any marks. They always bury it under a ha'nted house or
on an island, or under a dead tree that's got one limb sticking out.
Well, we've tried Jackson's Island a little, and we can try it again
some time; and there's the old ha'nted house up the Still-House branch,
and there's lots of dead-limb trees--dead loads of 'em."

"Is it under all of them?"

"How you talk! No!"

"Then how you going to know which one to go for?"

"Go for all of 'em!"

"Why, Tom, it'll take all summer."

"Well, what of that? Suppose you find a brass pot with a hundred
dollars in it, all rusty and gray, or rotten chest full of di'monds.
How's that?"

Huck's eyes glowed.

"That's bully. Plenty bully enough for me. Just you gimme the hundred
dollars and I don't want no di'monds."

"All right. But I bet you I ain't going to throw off on di'monds. Some
of 'em's worth twenty dollars apiece--there ain't any, hardly, but's
worth six bits or a dollar."

"No! Is that so?"

"Cert'nly--anybody'll tell you so. Hain't you ever seen one, Huck?"

"Not as I remember."

"Oh, kings have slathers of them."

"Well, I don' know no kings, Tom."

"I reckon you don't. But if you was to go to Europe you'd see a raft
of 'em hopping around."

"Do they hop?"

"Hop?--your granny! No!"

"Well, what did you say they did, for?"

"Shucks, I only meant you'd SEE 'em--not hopping, of course--what do
they want to hop for?--but I mean you'd just see 'em--scattered around,
you know, in a kind of a general way. Like that old humpbacked Richard."

"Richard? What's his other name?"

"He didn't have any other name. Kings don't have any but a given name."

"No?"

"But they don't."

"Well, if they like it, Tom, all right; but I don't want to be a king
and have only just a given name, like a nigger. But say--where you
going to dig first?"

"Well, I don't know. S'pose we tackle that old dead-limb tree on the
hill t'other side of Still-House branch?"

"I'm agreed."

So they got a crippled pick and a shovel, and set out on their
three-mile tramp. They arrived hot and panting, and threw themselves
down in the shade of a neighboring elm to rest and have a smoke.

"I like this," said Tom.

"So do I."

"Say, Huck, if we find a treasure here, what you going to do with your
share?"

"Well, I'll have pie and a glass of soda every day, and I'll go to
every circus that comes along. I bet I'll have a gay time."

"Well, ain't you going to save any of it?"

"Save it? What for?"

"Why, so as to have something to live on, by and by."

"Oh, that ain't any use. Pap would come back to thish-yer town some
day and get his claws on it if I didn't hurry up, and I tell you he'd
clean it out pretty quick. What you going to do with yourn, Tom?"

"I'm going to buy a new drum, and a sure-'nough sword, and a red
necktie and a bull pup, and get married."

"Married!"

"That's it."

"Tom, you--why, you ain't in your right mind."

"Wait--you'll see."

"Well, that's the foolishest thing you could do. Look at pap and my
mother. Fight! Why, they used to fight all the time. I remember, mighty
well."

"That ain't anything. The girl I'm going to marry won't fight."

"Tom, I reckon they're all alike. They'll all comb a body. Now you
better think 'bout this awhile. I tell you you better. What's the name
of the gal?"

"It ain't a gal at all--it's a girl."

"It's all the same, I reckon; some says gal, some says girl--both's
right, like enough. Anyway, what's her name, Tom?"

"I'll tell you some time--not now."

"All right--that'll do. Only if you get married I'll be more lonesomer
than ever."

"No you won't. You'll come and live with me. Now stir out of this and
we'll go to digging."

They worked and sweated for half an hour. No result. They toiled
another half-hour. Still no result. Huck said:

"Do they always bury it as deep as this?"

"Sometimes--not always. Not generally. I reckon we haven't got the
right place."

So they chose a new spot and began again. The labor dragged a little,
but still they made progress. They pegged away in silence for some
time. Finally Huck leaned on his shovel, swabbed the beaded drops from
his brow with his sleeve, and said:

"Where you going to dig next, after we get this one?"

"I reckon maybe we'll tackle the old tree that's over yonder on
Cardiff Hill back of the widow's."

"I reckon that'll be a good one. But won't the widow take it away from
us, Tom? It's on her land."

"SHE take it away! Maybe she'd like to try it once. Whoever finds one
of these hid treasures, it belongs to him. It don't make any difference
whose land it's on."

That was satisfactory. The work went on. By and by Huck said:

"Blame it, we must be in the wrong place again. What do you think?"

"It is mighty curious, Huck. I don't understand it. Sometimes witches
interfere. I reckon maybe that's what's the trouble now."

"Shucks! Witches ain't got no power in the daytime."

"Well, that's so. I didn't think of that. Oh, I know what the matter
is! What a blamed lot of fools we are! You got to find out where the
shadow of the limb falls at midnight, and that's where you dig!"

"Then consound it, we've fooled away all this work for nothing. Now
hang it all, we got to come back in the night. It's an awful long way.
Can you get out?"

"I bet I will. We've got to do it to-night, too, because if somebody
sees these holes they'll know in a minute what's here and they'll go
for it."

"Well, I'll come around and maow to-night."

"All right. Let's hide the tools in the bushes."

The boys were there that night, about the appointed time. They sat in
the shadow waiting. It was a lonely place, and an hour made solemn by
old traditions. Spirits whispered in the rustling leaves, ghosts lurked
in the murky nooks, the deep baying of a hound floated up out of the
distance, an owl answered with his sepulchral note. The boys were
subdued by these solemnities, and talked little. By and by they judged
that twelve had come; they marked where the shadow fell, and began to
dig. Their hopes commenced to rise. Their interest grew stronger, and
their industry kept pace with it. The hole deepened and still deepened,
but every time their hearts jumped to hear the pick strike upon
something, they only suffered a new disappointment. It was only a stone
or a chunk. At last Tom said:

"It ain't any use, Huck, we're wrong again."

"Well, but we CAN'T be wrong. We spotted the shadder to a dot."

"I know it, but then there's another thing."

"What's that?".

"Why, we only guessed at the time. Like enough it was too late or too
early."

Huck dropped his shovel.

"That's it," said he. "That's the very trouble. We got to give this
one up. We can't ever tell the right time, and besides this kind of
thing's too awful, here this time of night with witches and ghosts
a-fluttering around so. I feel as if something's behind me all the time;
and I'm afeard to turn around, becuz maybe there's others in front
a-waiting for a chance. I been creeping all over, ever since I got here."

"Well, I've been pretty much so, too, Huck. They most always put in a
dead man when they bury a treasure under a tree, to look out for it."

"Lordy!"

"Yes, they do. I've always heard that."

"Tom, I don't like to fool around much where there's dead people. A
body's bound to get into trouble with 'em, sure."

"I don't like to stir 'em up, either. S'pose this one here was to
stick his skull out and say something!"

"Don't Tom! It's awful."

"Well, it just is. Huck, I don't feel comfortable a bit."

"Say, Tom, let's give this place up, and try somewheres else."

"All right, I reckon we better."

"What'll it be?"

Tom considered awhile; and then said:

"The ha'nted house. That's it!"

"Blame it, I don't like ha'nted houses, Tom. Why, they're a dern sight
worse'n dead people. Dead people might talk, maybe, but they don't come
sliding around in a shroud, when you ain't noticing, and peep over your
shoulder all of a sudden and grit their teeth, the way a ghost does. I
couldn't stand such a thing as that, Tom--nobody could."

"Yes, but, Huck, ghosts don't travel around only at night. They won't
hender us from digging there in the daytime."

"Well, that's so. But you know mighty well people don't go about that
ha'nted house in the day nor the night."

"Well, that's mostly because they don't like to go where a man's been
murdered, anyway--but nothing's ever been seen around that house except
in the night--just some blue lights slipping by the windows--no regular
ghosts."

"Well, where you see one of them blue lights flickering around, Tom,
you can bet there's a ghost mighty close behind it. It stands to
reason. Becuz you know that they don't anybody but ghosts use 'em."

"Yes, that's so. But anyway they don't come around in the daytime, so
what's the use of our being afeard?"

"Well, all right. We'll tackle the ha'nted house if you say so--but I
reckon it's taking chances."

They had started down the hill by this time. There in the middle of
the moonlit valley below them stood the "ha'nted" house, utterly
isolated, its fences gone long ago, rank weeds smothering the very
doorsteps, the chimney crumbled to ruin, the window-sashes vacant, a
corner of the roof caved in. The boys gazed awhile, half expecting to
see a blue light flit past a window; then talking in a low tone, as
befitted the time and the circumstances, they struck far off to the
right, to give the haunted house a wide berth, and took their way
homeward through the woods that adorned the rearward side of Cardiff
Hill.



CHAPTER XXVI

ABOUT noon the next day the boys arrived at the dead tree; they had
come for their tools. Tom was impatient to go to the haunted house;
Huck was measurably so, also--but suddenly said:

"Lookyhere, Tom, do you know what day it is?"

Tom mentally ran over the days of the week, and then quickly lifted
his eyes with a startled look in them--

"My! I never once thought of it, Huck!"

"Well, I didn't neither, but all at once it popped onto me that it was
Friday."

"Blame it, a body can't be too careful, Huck. We might 'a' got into an
awful scrape, tackling such a thing on a Friday."

"MIGHT! Better say we WOULD! There's some lucky days, maybe, but
Friday ain't."

"Any fool knows that. I don't reckon YOU was the first that found it
out, Huck."

"Well, I never said I was, did I? And Friday ain't all, neither. I had
a rotten bad dream last night--dreampt about rats."

"No! Sure sign of trouble. Did they fight?"

"No."

"Well, that's good, Huck. When they don't fight it's only a sign that
there's trouble around, you know. All we got to do is to look mighty
sharp and keep out of it. We'll drop this thing for to-day, and play.
Do you know Robin Hood, Huck?"

"No. Who's Robin Hood?"

"Why, he was one of the greatest men that was ever in England--and the
best. He was a robber."

"Cracky, I wisht I was. Who did he rob?"

"Only sheriffs and bishops and rich people and kings, and such like.
But he never bothered the poor. He loved 'em. He always divided up with
'em perfectly square."

"Well, he must 'a' been a brick."

"I bet you he was, Huck. Oh, he was the noblest man that ever was.
They ain't any such men now, I can tell you. He could lick any man in
England, with one hand tied behind him; and he could take his yew bow
and plug a ten-cent piece every time, a mile and a half."

"What's a YEW bow?"

"I don't know. It's some kind of a bow, of course. And if he hit that
dime only on the edge he would set down and cry--and curse. But we'll
play Robin Hood--it's nobby fun. I'll learn you."

"I'm agreed."

So they played Robin Hood all the afternoon, now and then casting a
yearning eye down upon the haunted house and passing a remark about the
morrow's prospects and possibilities there. As the sun began to sink
into the west they took their way homeward athwart the long shadows of
the trees and soon were buried from sight in the forests of Cardiff
Hill.

On Saturday, shortly after noon, the boys were at the dead tree again.
They had a smoke and a chat in the shade, and then dug a little in
their last hole, not with great hope, but merely because Tom said there
were so many cases where people had given up a treasure after getting
down within six inches of it, and then somebody else had come along and
turned it up with a single thrust of a shovel. The thing failed this
time, however, so the boys shouldered their tools and went away feeling
that they had not trifled with fortune, but had fulfilled all the
requirements that belong to the business of treasure-hunting.

When they reached the haunted house there was something so weird and
grisly about the dead silence that reigned there under the baking sun,
and something so depressing about the loneliness and desolation of the
place, that they were afraid, for a moment, to venture in. Then they
crept to the door and took a trembling peep. They saw a weed-grown,
floorless room, unplastered, an ancient fireplace, vacant windows, a
ruinous staircase; and here, there, and everywhere hung ragged and
abandoned cobwebs. They presently entered, softly, with quickened
pulses, talking in whispers, ears alert to catch the slightest sound,
and muscles tense and ready for instant retreat.

In a little while familiarity modified their fears and they gave the
place a critical and interested examination, rather admiring their own
boldness, and wondering at it, too. Next they wanted to look up-stairs.
This was something like cutting off retreat, but they got to daring
each other, and of course there could be but one result--they threw
their tools into a corner and made the ascent. Up there were the same
signs of decay. In one corner they found a closet that promised
mystery, but the promise was a fraud--there was nothing in it. Their
courage was up now and well in hand. They were about to go down and
begin work when--

"Sh!" said Tom.

"What is it?" whispered Huck, blanching with fright.

"Sh! ... There! ... Hear it?"

"Yes! ... Oh, my! Let's run!"

"Keep still! Don't you budge! They're coming right toward the door."

The boys stretched themselves upon the floor with their eyes to
knot-holes in the planking, and lay waiting, in a misery of fear.

"They've stopped.... No--coming.... Here they are. Don't whisper
another word, Huck. My goodness, I wish I was out of this!"

Two men entered. Each boy said to himself: "There's the old deaf and
dumb Spaniard that's been about town once or twice lately--never saw
t'other man before."

"T'other" was a ragged, unkempt creature, with nothing very pleasant
in his face. The Spaniard was wrapped in a serape; he had bushy white
whiskers; long white hair flowed from under his sombrero, and he wore
green goggles. When they came in, "t'other" was talking in a low voice;
they sat down on the ground, facing the door, with their backs to the
wall, and the speaker continued his remarks. His manner became less
guarded and his words more distinct as he proceeded:

"No," said he, "I've thought it all over, and I don't like it. It's
dangerous."

"Dangerous!" grunted the "deaf and dumb" Spaniard--to the vast
surprise of the boys. "Milksop!"

This voice made the boys gasp and quake. It was Injun Joe's! There was
silence for some time. Then Joe said:

"What's any more dangerous than that job up yonder--but nothing's come
of it."

"That's different. Away up the river so, and not another house about.
'Twon't ever be known that we tried, anyway, long as we didn't succeed."

"Well, what's more dangerous than coming here in the daytime!--anybody
would suspicion us that saw us."

"I know that. But there warn't any other place as handy after that
fool of a job. I want to quit this shanty. I wanted to yesterday, only
it warn't any use trying to stir out of here, with those infernal boys
playing over there on the hill right in full view."

"Those infernal boys" quaked again under the inspiration of this
remark, and thought how lucky it was that they had remembered it was
Friday and concluded to wait a day. They wished in their hearts they
had waited a year.

The two men got out some food and made a luncheon. After a long and
thoughtful silence, Injun Joe said:

"Look here, lad--you go back up the river where you belong. Wait there
till you hear from me. I'll take the chances on dropping into this town
just once more, for a look. We'll do that 'dangerous' job after I've
spied around a little and think things look well for it. Then for
Texas! We'll leg it together!"

This was satisfactory. Both men presently fell to yawning, and Injun
Joe said:

"I'm dead for sleep! It's your turn to watch."

He curled down in the weeds and soon began to snore. His comrade
stirred him once or twice and he became quiet. Presently the watcher
began to nod; his head drooped lower and lower, both men began to snore
now.

The boys drew a long, grateful breath. Tom whispered:

"Now's our chance--come!"

Huck said:

"I can't--I'd die if they was to wake."

Tom urged--Huck held back. At last Tom rose slowly and softly, and
started alone. But the first step he made wrung such a hideous creak
from the crazy floor that he sank down almost dead with fright. He
never made a second attempt. The boys lay there counting the dragging
moments till it seemed to them that time must be done and eternity
growing gray; and then they were grateful to note that at last the sun
was setting.

Now one snore ceased. Injun Joe sat up, stared around--smiled grimly
upon his comrade, whose head was drooping upon his knees--stirred him
up with his foot and said:

"Here! YOU'RE a watchman, ain't you! All right, though--nothing's
happened."

"My! have I been asleep?"

"Oh, partly, partly. Nearly time for us to be moving, pard. What'll we
do with what little swag we've got left?"

"I don't know--leave it here as we've always done, I reckon. No use to
take it away till we start south. Six hundred and fifty in silver's
something to carry."

"Well--all right--it won't matter to come here once more."

"No--but I'd say come in the night as we used to do--it's better."

"Yes: but look here; it may be a good while before I get the right
chance at that job; accidents might happen; 'tain't in such a very good
place; we'll just regularly bury it--and bury it deep."

"Good idea," said the comrade, who walked across the room, knelt down,
raised one of the rearward hearth-stones and took out a bag that
jingled pleasantly. He subtracted from it twenty or thirty dollars for
himself and as much for Injun Joe, and passed the bag to the latter,
who was on his knees in the corner, now, digging with his bowie-knife.

The boys forgot all their fears, all their miseries in an instant.
With gloating eyes they watched every movement. Luck!--the splendor of
it was beyond all imagination! Six hundred dollars was money enough to
make half a dozen boys rich! Here was treasure-hunting under the
happiest auspices--there would not be any bothersome uncertainty as to
where to dig. They nudged each other every moment--eloquent nudges and
easily understood, for they simply meant--"Oh, but ain't you glad NOW
we're here!"

Joe's knife struck upon something.

"Hello!" said he.

"What is it?" said his comrade.

"Half-rotten plank--no, it's a box, I believe. Here--bear a hand and
we'll see what it's here for. Never mind, I've broke a hole."

He reached his hand in and drew it out--

"Man, it's money!"

The two men examined the handful of coins. They were gold. The boys
above were as excited as themselves, and as delighted.

Joe's comrade said:

"We'll make quick work of this. There's an old rusty pick over amongst
the weeds in the corner the other side of the fireplace--I saw it a
minute ago."

He ran and brought the boys' pick and shovel. Injun Joe took the pick,
looked it over critically, shook his head, muttered something to
himself, and then began to use it. The box was soon unearthed. It was
not very large; it was iron bound and had been very strong before the
slow years had injured it. The men contemplated the treasure awhile in
blissful silence.

"Pard, there's thousands of dollars here," said Injun Joe.

"'Twas always said that Murrel's gang used to be around here one
summer," the stranger observed.

"I know it," said Injun Joe; "and this looks like it, I should say."

"Now you won't need to do that job."

The half-breed frowned. Said he:

"You don't know me. Least you don't know all about that thing. 'Tain't
robbery altogether--it's REVENGE!" and a wicked light flamed in his
eyes. "I'll need your help in it. When it's finished--then Texas. Go
home to your Nance and your kids, and stand by till you hear from me."

"Well--if you say so; what'll we do with this--bury it again?"

"Yes. [Ravishing delight overhead.] NO! by the great Sachem, no!
[Profound distress overhead.] I'd nearly forgot. That pick had fresh
earth on it! [The boys were sick with terror in a moment.] What
business has a pick and a shovel here? What business with fresh earth
on them? Who brought them here--and where are they gone? Have you heard
anybody?--seen anybody? What! bury it again and leave them to come and
see the ground disturbed? Not exactly--not exactly. We'll take it to my
den."

"Why, of course! Might have thought of that before. You mean Number
One?"

"No--Number Two--under the cross. The other place is bad--too common."

"All right. It's nearly dark enough to start."

Injun Joe got up and went about from window to window cautiously
peeping out. Presently he said:

"Who could have brought those tools here? Do you reckon they can be
up-stairs?"

The boys' breath forsook them. Injun Joe put his hand on his knife,
halted a moment, undecided, and then turned toward the stairway. The
boys thought of the closet, but their strength was gone. The steps came
creaking up the stairs--the intolerable distress of the situation woke
the stricken resolution of the lads--they were about to spring for the
closet, when there was a crash of rotten timbers and Injun Joe landed
on the ground amid the debris of the ruined stairway. He gathered
himself up cursing, and his comrade said:

"Now what's the use of all that? If it's anybody, and they're up
there, let them STAY there--who cares? If they want to jump down, now,
and get into trouble, who objects? It will be dark in fifteen minutes
--and then let them follow us if they want to. I'm willing. In my
opinion, whoever hove those things in here caught a sight of us and
took us for ghosts or devils or something. I'll bet they're running
yet."

Joe grumbled awhile; then he agreed with his friend that what daylight
was left ought to be economized in getting things ready for leaving.
Shortly afterward they slipped out of the house in the deepening
twilight, and moved toward the river with their precious box.

Tom and Huck rose up, weak but vastly relieved, and stared after them
through the chinks between the logs of the house. Follow? Not they.
They were content to reach ground again without broken necks, and take
the townward track over the hill. They did not talk much. They were too
much absorbed in hating themselves--hating the ill luck that made them
take the spade and the pick there. But for that, Injun Joe never would
have suspected. He would have hidden the silver with the gold to wait
there till his "revenge" was satisfied, and then he would have had the
misfortune to find that money turn up missing. Bitter, bitter luck that
the tools were ever brought there!

They resolved to keep a lookout for that Spaniard when he should come
to town spying out for chances to do his revengeful job, and follow him
to "Number Two," wherever that might be. Then a ghastly thought
occurred to Tom.

"Revenge? What if he means US, Huck!"

"Oh, don't!" said Huck, nearly fainting.

They talked it all over, and as they entered town they agreed to
believe that he might possibly mean somebody else--at least that he
might at least mean nobody but Tom, since only Tom had testified.

Very, very small comfort it was to Tom to be alone in danger! Company
would be a palpable improvement, he thought.



CHAPTER XXVII

THE adventure of the day mightily tormented Tom's dreams that night.
Four times he had his hands on that rich treasure and four times it
wasted to nothingness in his fingers as sleep forsook him and
wakefulness brought back the hard reality of his misfortune. As he lay
in the early morning recalling the incidents of his great adventure, he
noticed that they seemed curiously subdued and far away--somewhat as if
they had happened in another world, or in a time long gone by. Then it
occurred to him that the great adventure itself must be a dream! There
was one very strong argument in favor of this idea--namely, that the
quantity of coin he had seen was too vast to be real. He had never seen
as much as fifty dollars in one mass before, and he was like all boys
of his age and station in life, in that he imagined that all references
to "hundreds" and "thousands" were mere fanciful forms of speech, and
that no such sums really existed in the world. He never had supposed
for a moment that so large a sum as a hundred dollars was to be found
in actual money in any one's possession. If his notions of hidden
treasure had been analyzed, they would have been found to consist of a
handful of real dimes and a bushel of vague, splendid, ungraspable
dollars.

But the incidents of his adventure grew sensibly sharper and clearer
under the attrition of thinking them over, and so he presently found
himself leaning to the impression that the thing might not have been a
dream, after all. This uncertainty must be swept away. He would snatch
a hurried breakfast and go and find Huck. Huck was sitting on the
gunwale of a flatboat, listlessly dangling his feet in the water and
looking very melancholy. Tom concluded to let Huck lead up to the
subject. If he did not do it, then the adventure would be proved to
have been only a dream.

"Hello, Huck!"

"Hello, yourself."

Silence, for a minute.

"Tom, if we'd 'a' left the blame tools at the dead tree, we'd 'a' got
the money. Oh, ain't it awful!"

"'Tain't a dream, then, 'tain't a dream! Somehow I most wish it was.
Dog'd if I don't, Huck."

"What ain't a dream?"

"Oh, that thing yesterday. I been half thinking it was."

"Dream! If them stairs hadn't broke down you'd 'a' seen how much dream
it was! I've had dreams enough all night--with that patch-eyed Spanish
devil going for me all through 'em--rot him!"

"No, not rot him. FIND him! Track the money!"

"Tom, we'll never find him. A feller don't have only one chance for
such a pile--and that one's lost. I'd feel mighty shaky if I was to see
him, anyway."

"Well, so'd I; but I'd like to see him, anyway--and track him out--to
his Number Two."

"Number Two--yes, that's it. I been thinking 'bout that. But I can't
make nothing out of it. What do you reckon it is?"

"I dono. It's too deep. Say, Huck--maybe it's the number of a house!"

"Goody! ... No, Tom, that ain't it. If it is, it ain't in this
one-horse town. They ain't no numbers here."

"Well, that's so. Lemme think a minute. Here--it's the number of a
room--in a tavern, you know!"

"Oh, that's the trick! They ain't only two taverns. We can find out
quick."

"You stay here, Huck, till I come."

Tom was off at once. He did not care to have Huck's company in public
places. He was gone half an hour. He found that in the best tavern, No.
2 had long been occupied by a young lawyer, and was still so occupied.
In the less ostentatious house, No. 2 was a mystery. The
tavern-keeper's young son said it was kept locked all the time, and he
never saw anybody go into it or come out of it except at night; he did
not know any particular reason for this state of things; had had some
little curiosity, but it was rather feeble; had made the most of the
mystery by entertaining himself with the idea that that room was
"ha'nted"; had noticed that there was a light in there the night before.

"That's what I've found out, Huck. I reckon that's the very No. 2
we're after."

"I reckon it is, Tom. Now what you going to do?"

"Lemme think."

Tom thought a long time. Then he said:

"I'll tell you. The back door of that No. 2 is the door that comes out
into that little close alley between the tavern and the old rattle trap
of a brick store. Now you get hold of all the door-keys you can find,
and I'll nip all of auntie's, and the first dark night we'll go there
and try 'em. And mind you, keep a lookout for Injun Joe, because he
said he was going to drop into town and spy around once more for a
chance to get his revenge. If you see him, you just follow him; and if
he don't go to that No. 2, that ain't the place."

"Lordy, I don't want to foller him by myself!"

"Why, it'll be night, sure. He mightn't ever see you--and if he did,
maybe he'd never think anything."

"Well, if it's pretty dark I reckon I'll track him. I dono--I dono.
I'll try."

"You bet I'll follow him, if it's dark, Huck. Why, he might 'a' found
out he couldn't get his revenge, and be going right after that money."

"It's so, Tom, it's so. I'll foller him; I will, by jingoes!"

"Now you're TALKING! Don't you ever weaken, Huck, and I won't."



CHAPTER XXVIII

THAT night Tom and Huck were ready for their adventure. They hung
about the neighborhood of the tavern until after nine, one watching the
alley at a distance and the other the tavern door. Nobody entered the
alley or left it; nobody resembling the Spaniard entered or left the
tavern door. The night promised to be a fair one; so Tom went home with
the understanding that if a considerable degree of darkness came on,
Huck was to come and "maow," whereupon he would slip out and try the
keys. But the night remained clear, and Huck closed his watch and
retired to bed in an empty sugar hogshead about twelve.

Tuesday the boys had the same ill luck. Also Wednesday. But Thursday
night promised better. Tom slipped out in good season with his aunt's
old tin lantern, and a large towel to blindfold it with. He hid the
lantern in Huck's sugar hogshead and the watch began. An hour before
midnight the tavern closed up and its lights (the only ones
thereabouts) were put out. No Spaniard had been seen. Nobody had
entered or left the alley. Everything was auspicious. The blackness of
darkness reigned, the perfect stillness was interrupted only by
occasional mutterings of distant thunder.

Tom got his lantern, lit it in the hogshead, wrapped it closely in the
towel, and the two adventurers crept in the gloom toward the tavern.
Huck stood sentry and Tom felt his way into the alley. Then there was a
season of waiting anxiety that weighed upon Huck's spirits like a
mountain. He began to wish he could see a flash from the lantern--it
would frighten him, but it would at least tell him that Tom was alive
yet. It seemed hours since Tom had disappeared. Surely he must have
fainted; maybe he was dead; maybe his heart had burst under terror and
excitement. In his uneasiness Huck found himself drawing closer and
closer to the alley; fearing all sorts of dreadful things, and
momentarily expecting some catastrophe to happen that would take away
his breath. There was not much to take away, for he seemed only able to
inhale it by thimblefuls, and his heart would soon wear itself out, the
way it was beating. Suddenly there was a flash of light and Tom came
tearing by him: "Run!" said he; "run, for your life!"

He needn't have repeated it; once was enough; Huck was making thirty
or forty miles an hour before the repetition was uttered. The boys
never stopped till they reached the shed of a deserted slaughter-house
at the lower end of the village. Just as they got within its shelter
the storm burst and the rain poured down. As soon as Tom got his breath
he said:

"Huck, it was awful! I tried two of the keys, just as soft as I could;
but they seemed to make such a power of racket that I couldn't hardly
get my breath I was so scared. They wouldn't turn in the lock, either.
Well, without noticing what I was doing, I took hold of the knob, and
open comes the door! It warn't locked! I hopped in, and shook off the
towel, and, GREAT CAESAR'S GHOST!"

"What!--what'd you see, Tom?"

"Huck, I most stepped onto Injun Joe's hand!"

"No!"

"Yes! He was lying there, sound asleep on the floor, with his old
patch on his eye and his arms spread out."

"Lordy, what did you do? Did he wake up?"

"No, never budged. Drunk, I reckon. I just grabbed that towel and
started!"

"I'd never 'a' thought of the towel, I bet!"

"Well, I would. My aunt would make me mighty sick if I lost it."

"Say, Tom, did you see that box?"

"Huck, I didn't wait to look around. I didn't see the box, I didn't
see the cross. I didn't see anything but a bottle and a tin cup on the
floor by Injun Joe; yes, I saw two barrels and lots more bottles in the
room. Don't you see, now, what's the matter with that ha'nted room?"

"How?"

"Why, it's ha'nted with whiskey! Maybe ALL the Temperance Taverns have
got a ha'nted room, hey, Huck?"

"Well, I reckon maybe that's so. Who'd 'a' thought such a thing? But
say, Tom, now's a mighty good time to get that box, if Injun Joe's
drunk."

"It is, that! You try it!"

Huck shuddered.

"Well, no--I reckon not."

"And I reckon not, Huck. Only one bottle alongside of Injun Joe ain't
enough. If there'd been three, he'd be drunk enough and I'd do it."

There was a long pause for reflection, and then Tom said:

"Lookyhere, Huck, less not try that thing any more till we know Injun
Joe's not in there. It's too scary. Now, if we watch every night, we'll
be dead sure to see him go out, some time or other, and then we'll
snatch that box quicker'n lightning."

"Well, I'm agreed. I'll watch the whole night long, and I'll do it
every night, too, if you'll do the other part of the job."

"All right, I will. All you got to do is to trot up Hooper Street a
block and maow--and if I'm asleep, you throw some gravel at the window
and that'll fetch me."

"Agreed, and good as wheat!"

"Now, Huck, the storm's over, and I'll go home. It'll begin to be
daylight in a couple of hours. You go back and watch that long, will
you?"

"I said I would, Tom, and I will. I'll ha'nt that tavern every night
for a year! I'll sleep all day and I'll stand watch all night."

"That's all right. Now, where you going to sleep?"

"In Ben Rogers' hayloft. He lets me, and so does his pap's nigger man,
Uncle Jake. I tote water for Uncle Jake whenever he wants me to, and
any time I ask him he gives me a little something to eat if he can
spare it. That's a mighty good nigger, Tom. He likes me, becuz I don't
ever act as if I was above him. Sometime I've set right down and eat
WITH him. But you needn't tell that. A body's got to do things when
he's awful hungry he wouldn't want to do as a steady thing."

"Well, if I don't want you in the daytime, I'll let you sleep. I won't
come bothering around. Any time you see something's up, in the night,
just skip right around and maow."



CHAPTER XXIX

THE first thing Tom heard on Friday morning was a glad piece of news
--Judge Thatcher's family had come back to town the night before. Both
Injun Joe and the treasure sunk into secondary importance for a moment,
and Becky took the chief place in the boy's interest. He saw her and
they had an exhausting good time playing "hi-spy" and "gully-keeper"
with a crowd of their school-mates. The day was completed and crowned
in a peculiarly satisfactory way: Becky teased her mother to appoint
the next day for the long-promised and long-delayed picnic, and she
consented. The child's delight was boundless; and Tom's not more
moderate. The invitations were sent out before sunset, and straightway
the young folks of the village were thrown into a fever of preparation
and pleasurable anticipation. Tom's excitement enabled him to keep
awake until a pretty late hour, and he had good hopes of hearing Huck's
"maow," and of having his treasure to astonish Becky and the picnickers
with, next day; but he was disappointed. No signal came that night.

Morning came, eventually, and by ten or eleven o'clock a giddy and
rollicking company were gathered at Judge Thatcher's, and everything
was ready for a start. It was not the custom for elderly people to mar
the picnics with their presence. The children were considered safe
enough under the wings of a few young ladies of eighteen and a few
young gentlemen of twenty-three or thereabouts. The old steam ferryboat
was chartered for the occasion; presently the gay throng filed up the
main street laden with provision-baskets. Sid was sick and had to miss
the fun; Mary remained at home to entertain him. The last thing Mrs.
Thatcher said to Becky, was:

"You'll not get back till late. Perhaps you'd better stay all night
with some of the girls that live near the ferry-landing, child."

"Then I'll stay with Susy Harper, mamma."

"Very well. And mind and behave yourself and don't be any trouble."

Presently, as they tripped along, Tom said to Becky:

"Say--I'll tell you what we'll do. 'Stead of going to Joe Harper's
we'll climb right up the hill and stop at the Widow Douglas'. She'll
have ice-cream! She has it most every day--dead loads of it. And she'll
be awful glad to have us."

"Oh, that will be fun!"

Then Becky reflected a moment and said:

"But what will mamma say?"

"How'll she ever know?"

The girl turned the idea over in her mind, and said reluctantly:

"I reckon it's wrong--but--"

"But shucks! Your mother won't know, and so what's the harm? All she
wants is that you'll be safe; and I bet you she'd 'a' said go there if
she'd 'a' thought of it. I know she would!"

The Widow Douglas' splendid hospitality was a tempting bait. It and
Tom's persuasions presently carried the day. So it was decided to say
nothing anybody about the night's programme. Presently it occurred to
Tom that maybe Huck might come this very night and give the signal. The
thought took a deal of the spirit out of his anticipations. Still he
could not bear to give up the fun at Widow Douglas'. And why should he
give it up, he reasoned--the signal did not come the night before, so
why should it be any more likely to come to-night? The sure fun of the
evening outweighed the uncertain treasure; and, boy-like, he determined
to yield to the stronger inclination and not allow himself to think of
the box of money another time that day.

Three miles below town the ferryboat stopped at the mouth of a woody
hollow and tied up. The crowd swarmed ashore and soon the forest
distances and craggy heights echoed far and near with shoutings and
laughter. All the different ways of getting hot and tired were gone
through with, and by-and-by the rovers straggled back to camp fortified
with responsible appetites, and then the destruction of the good things
began. After the feast there was a refreshing season of rest and chat
in the shade of spreading oaks. By-and-by somebody shouted:

"Who's ready for the cave?"

Everybody was. Bundles of candles were procured, and straightway there
was a general scamper up the hill. The mouth of the cave was up the
hillside--an opening shaped like a letter A. Its massive oaken door
stood unbarred. Within was a small chamber, chilly as an ice-house, and
walled by Nature with solid limestone that was dewy with a cold sweat.
It was romantic and mysterious to stand here in the deep gloom and look
out upon the green valley shining in the sun. But the impressiveness of
the situation quickly wore off, and the romping began again. The moment
a candle was lighted there was a general rush upon the owner of it; a
struggle and a gallant defence followed, but the candle was soon
knocked down or blown out, and then there was a glad clamor of laughter
and a new chase. But all things have an end. By-and-by the procession
went filing down the steep descent of the main avenue, the flickering
rank of lights dimly revealing the lofty walls of rock almost to their
point of junction sixty feet overhead. This main avenue was not more
than eight or ten feet wide. Every few steps other lofty and still
narrower crevices branched from it on either hand--for McDougal's cave
was but a vast labyrinth of crooked aisles that ran into each other and
out again and led nowhere. It was said that one might wander days and
nights together through its intricate tangle of rifts and chasms, and
never find the end of the cave; and that he might go down, and down,
and still down, into the earth, and it was just the same--labyrinth
under labyrinth, and no end to any of them. No man "knew" the cave.
That was an impossible thing. Most of the young men knew a portion of
it, and it was not customary to venture much beyond this known portion.
Tom Sawyer knew as much of the cave as any one.

The procession moved along the main avenue some three-quarters of a
mile, and then groups and couples began to slip aside into branch
avenues, fly along the dismal corridors, and take each other by
surprise at points where the corridors joined again. Parties were able
to elude each other for the space of half an hour without going beyond
the "known" ground.

By-and-by, one group after another came straggling back to the mouth
of the cave, panting, hilarious, smeared from head to foot with tallow
drippings, daubed with clay, and entirely delighted with the success of
the day. Then they were astonished to find that they had been taking no
note of time and that night was about at hand. The clanging bell had
been calling for half an hour. However, this sort of close to the day's
adventures was romantic and therefore satisfactory. When the ferryboat
with her wild freight pushed into the stream, nobody cared sixpence for
the wasted time but the captain of the craft.

Huck was already upon his watch when the ferryboat's lights went
glinting past the wharf. He heard no noise on board, for the young
people were as subdued and still as people usually are who are nearly
tired to death. He wondered what boat it was, and why she did not stop
at the wharf--and then he dropped her out of his mind and put his
attention upon his business. The night was growing cloudy and dark. Ten
o'clock came, and the noise of vehicles ceased, scattered lights began
to wink out, all straggling foot-passengers disappeared, the village
betook itself to its slumbers and left the small watcher alone with the
silence and the ghosts. Eleven o'clock came, and the tavern lights were
put out; darkness everywhere, now. Huck waited what seemed a weary long
time, but nothing happened. His faith was weakening. Was there any use?
Was there really any use? Why not give it up and turn in?

A noise fell upon his ear. He was all attention in an instant. The
alley door closed softly. He sprang to the corner of the brick store.
The next moment two men brushed by him, and one seemed to have
something under his arm. It must be that box! So they were going to
remove the treasure. Why call Tom now? It would be absurd--the men
would get away with the box and never be found again. No, he would
stick to their wake and follow them; he would trust to the darkness for
security from discovery. So communing with himself, Huck stepped out
and glided along behind the men, cat-like, with bare feet, allowing
them to keep just far enough ahead not to be invisible.

They moved up the river street three blocks, then turned to the left
up a cross-street. They went straight ahead, then, until they came to
the path that led up Cardiff Hill; this they took. They passed by the
old Welshman's house, half-way up the hill, without hesitating, and
still climbed upward. Good, thought Huck, they will bury it in the old
quarry. But they never stopped at the quarry. They passed on, up the
summit. They plunged into the narrow path between the tall sumach
bushes, and were at once hidden in the gloom. Huck closed up and
shortened his distance, now, for they would never be able to see him.
He trotted along awhile; then slackened his pace, fearing he was
gaining too fast; moved on a piece, then stopped altogether; listened;
no sound; none, save that he seemed to hear the beating of his own
heart. The hooting of an owl came over the hill--ominous sound! But no
footsteps. Heavens, was everything lost! He was about to spring with
winged feet, when a man cleared his throat not four feet from him!
Huck's heart shot into his throat, but he swallowed it again; and then
he stood there shaking as if a dozen agues had taken charge of him at
once, and so weak that he thought he must surely fall to the ground. He
knew where he was. He knew he was within five steps of the stile
leading into Widow Douglas' grounds. Very well, he thought, let them
bury it there; it won't be hard to find.

Now there was a voice--a very low voice--Injun Joe's:

"Damn her, maybe she's got company--there's lights, late as it is."

"I can't see any."

This was that stranger's voice--the stranger of the haunted house. A
deadly chill went to Huck's heart--this, then, was the "revenge" job!
His thought was, to fly. Then he remembered that the Widow Douglas had
been kind to him more than once, and maybe these men were going to
murder her. He wished he dared venture to warn her; but he knew he
didn't dare--they might come and catch him. He thought all this and
more in the moment that elapsed between the stranger's remark and Injun
Joe's next--which was--

"Because the bush is in your way. Now--this way--now you see, don't
you?"

"Yes. Well, there IS company there, I reckon. Better give it up."

"Give it up, and I just leaving this country forever! Give it up and
maybe never have another chance. I tell you again, as I've told you
before, I don't care for her swag--you may have it. But her husband was
rough on me--many times he was rough on me--and mainly he was the
justice of the peace that jugged me for a vagrant. And that ain't all.
It ain't a millionth part of it! He had me HORSEWHIPPED!--horsewhipped
in front of the jail, like a nigger!--with all the town looking on!
HORSEWHIPPED!--do you understand? He took advantage of me and died. But
I'll take it out of HER."

"Oh, don't kill her! Don't do that!"

"Kill? Who said anything about killing? I would kill HIM if he was
here; but not her. When you want to get revenge on a woman you don't
kill her--bosh! you go for her looks. You slit her nostrils--you notch
her ears like a sow!"

"By God, that's--"

"Keep your opinion to yourself! It will be safest for you. I'll tie
her to the bed. If she bleeds to death, is that my fault? I'll not cry,
if she does. My friend, you'll help me in this thing--for MY sake
--that's why you're here--I mightn't be able alone. If you flinch, I'll
kill you. Do you understand that? And if I have to kill you, I'll kill
her--and then I reckon nobody'll ever know much about who done this
business."

"Well, if it's got to be done, let's get at it. The quicker the
better--I'm all in a shiver."

"Do it NOW? And company there? Look here--I'll get suspicious of you,
first thing you know. No--we'll wait till the lights are out--there's
no hurry."

Huck felt that a silence was going to ensue--a thing still more awful
than any amount of murderous talk; so he held his breath and stepped
gingerly back; planted his foot carefully and firmly, after balancing,
one-legged, in a precarious way and almost toppling over, first on one
side and then on the other. He took another step back, with the same
elaboration and the same risks; then another and another, and--a twig
snapped under his foot! His breath stopped and he listened. There was
no sound--the stillness was perfect. His gratitude was measureless. Now
he turned in his tracks, between the walls of sumach bushes--turned
himself as carefully as if he were a ship--and then stepped quickly but
cautiously along. When he emerged at the quarry he felt secure, and so
he picked up his nimble heels and flew. Down, down he sped, till he
reached the Welshman's. He banged at the door, and presently the heads
of the old man and his two stalwart sons were thrust from windows.

"What's the row there? Who's banging? What do you want?"

"Let me in--quick! I'll tell everything."

"Why, who are you?"

"Huckleberry Finn--quick, let me in!"

"Huckleberry Finn, indeed! It ain't a name to open many doors, I
judge! But let him in, lads, and let's see what's the trouble."

"Please don't ever tell I told you," were Huck's first words when he
got in. "Please don't--I'd be killed, sure--but the widow's been good
friends to me sometimes, and I want to tell--I WILL tell if you'll
promise you won't ever say it was me."

"By George, he HAS got something to tell, or he wouldn't act so!"
exclaimed the old man; "out with it and nobody here'll ever tell, lad."

Three minutes later the old man and his sons, well armed, were up the
hill, and just entering the sumach path on tiptoe, their weapons in
their hands. Huck accompanied them no further. He hid behind a great
bowlder and fell to listening. There was a lagging, anxious silence,
and then all of a sudden there was an explosion of firearms and a cry.

Huck waited for no particulars. He sprang away and sped down the hill
as fast as his legs could carry him.



CHAPTER XXX

AS the earliest suspicion of dawn appeared on Sunday morning, Huck
came groping up the hill and rapped gently at the old Welshman's door.
The inmates were asleep, but it was a sleep that was set on a
hair-trigger, on account of the exciting episode of the night. A call
came from a window:

"Who's there!"

Huck's scared voice answered in a low tone:

"Please let me in! It's only Huck Finn!"

"It's a name that can open this door night or day, lad!--and welcome!"

These were strange words to the vagabond boy's ears, and the
pleasantest he had ever heard. He could not recollect that the closing
word had ever been applied in his case before. The door was quickly
unlocked, and he entered. Huck was given a seat and the old man and his
brace of tall sons speedily dressed themselves.

"Now, my boy, I hope you're good and hungry, because breakfast will be
ready as soon as the sun's up, and we'll have a piping hot one, too
--make yourself easy about that! I and the boys hoped you'd turn up and
stop here last night."

"I was awful scared," said Huck, "and I run. I took out when the
pistols went off, and I didn't stop for three mile. I've come now becuz
I wanted to know about it, you know; and I come before daylight becuz I
didn't want to run across them devils, even if they was dead."

"Well, poor chap, you do look as if you'd had a hard night of it--but
there's a bed here for you when you've had your breakfast. No, they
ain't dead, lad--we are sorry enough for that. You see we knew right
where to put our hands on them, by your description; so we crept along
on tiptoe till we got within fifteen feet of them--dark as a cellar
that sumach path was--and just then I found I was going to sneeze. It
was the meanest kind of luck! I tried to keep it back, but no use
--'twas bound to come, and it did come! I was in the lead with my pistol
raised, and when the sneeze started those scoundrels a-rustling to get
out of the path, I sung out, 'Fire boys!' and blazed away at the place
where the rustling was. So did the boys. But they were off in a jiffy,
those villains, and we after them, down through the woods. I judge we
never touched them. They fired a shot apiece as they started, but their
bullets whizzed by and didn't do us any harm. As soon as we lost the
sound of their feet we quit chasing, and went down and stirred up the
constables. They got a posse together, and went off to guard the river
bank, and as soon as it is light the sheriff and a gang are going to
beat up the woods. My boys will be with them presently. I wish we had
some sort of description of those rascals--'twould help a good deal.
But you couldn't see what they were like, in the dark, lad, I suppose?"

"Oh yes; I saw them down-town and follered them."

"Splendid! Describe them--describe them, my boy!"

"One's the old deaf and dumb Spaniard that's ben around here once or
twice, and t'other's a mean-looking, ragged--"

"That's enough, lad, we know the men! Happened on them in the woods
back of the widow's one day, and they slunk away. Off with you, boys,
and tell the sheriff--get your breakfast to-morrow morning!"

The Welshman's sons departed at once. As they were leaving the room
Huck sprang up and exclaimed:

"Oh, please don't tell ANYbody it was me that blowed on them! Oh,
please!"

"All right if you say it, Huck, but you ought to have the credit of
what you did."

"Oh no, no! Please don't tell!"

When the young men were gone, the old Welshman said:

"They won't tell--and I won't. But why don't you want it known?"

Huck would not explain, further than to say that he already knew too
much about one of those men and would not have the man know that he
knew anything against him for the whole world--he would be killed for
knowing it, sure.

The old man promised secrecy once more, and said:

"How did you come to follow these fellows, lad? Were they looking
suspicious?"

Huck was silent while he framed a duly cautious reply. Then he said:

"Well, you see, I'm a kind of a hard lot,--least everybody says so,
and I don't see nothing agin it--and sometimes I can't sleep much, on
account of thinking about it and sort of trying to strike out a new way
of doing. That was the way of it last night. I couldn't sleep, and so I
come along up-street 'bout midnight, a-turning it all over, and when I
got to that old shackly brick store by the Temperance Tavern, I backed
up agin the wall to have another think. Well, just then along comes
these two chaps slipping along close by me, with something under their
arm, and I reckoned they'd stole it. One was a-smoking, and t'other one
wanted a light; so they stopped right before me and the cigars lit up
their faces and I see that the big one was the deaf and dumb Spaniard,
by his white whiskers and the patch on his eye, and t'other one was a
rusty, ragged-looking devil."

"Could you see the rags by the light of the cigars?"

This staggered Huck for a moment. Then he said:

"Well, I don't know--but somehow it seems as if I did."

"Then they went on, and you--"

"Follered 'em--yes. That was it. I wanted to see what was up--they
sneaked along so. I dogged 'em to the widder's stile, and stood in the
dark and heard the ragged one beg for the widder, and the Spaniard
swear he'd spile her looks just as I told you and your two--"

"What! The DEAF AND DUMB man said all that!"

Huck had made another terrible mistake! He was trying his best to keep
the old man from getting the faintest hint of who the Spaniard might
be, and yet his tongue seemed determined to get him into trouble in
spite of all he could do. He made several efforts to creep out of his
scrape, but the old man's eye was upon him and he made blunder after
blunder. Presently the Welshman said:

"My boy, don't be afraid of me. I wouldn't hurt a hair of your head
for all the world. No--I'd protect you--I'd protect you. This Spaniard
is not deaf and dumb; you've let that slip without intending it; you
can't cover that up now. You know something about that Spaniard that
you want to keep dark. Now trust me--tell me what it is, and trust me
--I won't betray you."

Huck looked into the old man's honest eyes a moment, then bent over
and whispered in his ear:

"'Tain't a Spaniard--it's Injun Joe!"

The Welshman almost jumped out of his chair. In a moment he said:

"It's all plain enough, now. When you talked about notching ears and
slitting noses I judged that that was your own embellishment, because
white men don't take that sort of revenge. But an Injun! That's a
different matter altogether."

During breakfast the talk went on, and in the course of it the old man
said that the last thing which he and his sons had done, before going
to bed, was to get a lantern and examine the stile and its vicinity for
marks of blood. They found none, but captured a bulky bundle of--

"Of WHAT?"

If the words had been lightning they could not have leaped with a more
stunning suddenness from Huck's blanched lips. His eyes were staring
wide, now, and his breath suspended--waiting for the answer. The
Welshman started--stared in return--three seconds--five seconds--ten
--then replied:

"Of burglar's tools. Why, what's the MATTER with you?"

Huck sank back, panting gently, but deeply, unutterably grateful. The
Welshman eyed him gravely, curiously--and presently said:

"Yes, burglar's tools. That appears to relieve you a good deal. But
what did give you that turn? What were YOU expecting we'd found?"

Huck was in a close place--the inquiring eye was upon him--he would
have given anything for material for a plausible answer--nothing
suggested itself--the inquiring eye was boring deeper and deeper--a
senseless reply offered--there was no time to weigh it, so at a venture
he uttered it--feebly:

"Sunday-school books, maybe."

Poor Huck was too distressed to smile, but the old man laughed loud
and joyously, shook up the details of his anatomy from head to foot,
and ended by saying that such a laugh was money in a-man's pocket,
because it cut down the doctor's bill like everything. Then he added:

"Poor old chap, you're white and jaded--you ain't well a bit--no
wonder you're a little flighty and off your balance. But you'll come
out of it. Rest and sleep will fetch you out all right, I hope."

Huck was irritated to think he had been such a goose and betrayed such
a suspicious excitement, for he had dropped the idea that the parcel
brought from the tavern was the treasure, as soon as he had heard the
talk at the widow's stile. He had only thought it was not the treasure,
however--he had not known that it wasn't--and so the suggestion of a
captured bundle was too much for his self-possession. But on the whole
he felt glad the little episode had happened, for now he knew beyond
all question that that bundle was not THE bundle, and so his mind was
at rest and exceedingly comfortable. In fact, everything seemed to be
drifting just in the right direction, now; the treasure must be still
in No. 2, the men would be captured and jailed that day, and he and Tom
could seize the gold that night without any trouble or any fear of
interruption.

Just as breakfast was completed there was a knock at the door. Huck
jumped for a hiding-place, for he had no mind to be connected even
remotely with the late event. The Welshman admitted several ladies and
gentlemen, among them the Widow Douglas, and noticed that groups of
citizens were climbing up the hill--to stare at the stile. So the news
had spread. The Welshman had to tell the story of the night to the
visitors. The widow's gratitude for her preservation was outspoken.

"Don't say a word about it, madam. There's another that you're more
beholden to than you are to me and my boys, maybe, but he don't allow
me to tell his name. We wouldn't have been there but for him."

Of course this excited a curiosity so vast that it almost belittled
the main matter--but the Welshman allowed it to eat into the vitals of
his visitors, and through them be transmitted to the whole town, for he
refused to part with his secret. When all else had been learned, the
widow said:

"I went to sleep reading in bed and slept straight through all that
noise. Why didn't you come and wake me?"

"We judged it warn't worth while. Those fellows warn't likely to come
again--they hadn't any tools left to work with, and what was the use of
waking you up and scaring you to death? My three negro men stood guard
at your house all the rest of the night. They've just come back."

More visitors came, and the story had to be told and retold for a
couple of hours more.

There was no Sabbath-school during day-school vacation, but everybody
was early at church. The stirring event was well canvassed. News came
that not a sign of the two villains had been yet discovered. When the
sermon was finished, Judge Thatcher's wife dropped alongside of Mrs.
Harper as she moved down the aisle with the crowd and said:

"Is my Becky going to sleep all day? I just expected she would be
tired to death."

"Your Becky?"

"Yes," with a startled look--"didn't she stay with you last night?"

"Why, no."

Mrs. Thatcher turned pale, and sank into a pew, just as Aunt Polly,
talking briskly with a friend, passed by. Aunt Polly said:

"Good-morning, Mrs. Thatcher. Good-morning, Mrs. Harper. I've got a
boy that's turned up missing. I reckon my Tom stayed at your house last
night--one of you. And now he's afraid to come to church. I've got to
settle with him."

Mrs. Thatcher shook her head feebly and turned paler than ever.

"He didn't stay with us," said Mrs. Harper, beginning to look uneasy.
A marked anxiety came into Aunt Polly's face.

"Joe Harper, have you seen my Tom this morning?"

"No'm."

"When did you see him last?"

Joe tried to remember, but was not sure he could say. The people had
stopped moving out of church. Whispers passed along, and a boding
uneasiness took possession of every countenance. Children were
anxiously questioned, and young teachers. They all said they had not
noticed whether Tom and Becky were on board the ferryboat on the
homeward trip; it was dark; no one thought of inquiring if any one was
missing. One young man finally blurted out his fear that they were
still in the cave! Mrs. Thatcher swooned away. Aunt Polly fell to
crying and wringing her hands.

The alarm swept from lip to lip, from group to group, from street to
street, and within five minutes the bells were wildly clanging and the
whole town was up! The Cardiff Hill episode sank into instant
insignificance, the burglars were forgotten, horses were saddled,
skiffs were manned, the ferryboat ordered out, and before the horror
was half an hour old, two hundred men were pouring down highroad and
river toward the cave.

All the long afternoon the village seemed empty and dead. Many women
visited Aunt Polly and Mrs. Thatcher and tried to comfort them. They
cried with them, too, and that was still better than words. All the
tedious night the town waited for news; but when the morning dawned at
last, all the word that came was, "Send more candles--and send food."
Mrs. Thatcher was almost crazed; and Aunt Polly, also. Judge Thatcher
sent messages of hope and encouragement from the cave, but they
conveyed no real cheer.

The old Welshman came home toward daylight, spattered with
candle-grease, smeared with clay, and almost worn out. He found Huck
still in the bed that had been provided for him, and delirious with
fever. The physicians were all at the cave, so the Widow Douglas came
and took charge of the patient. She said she would do her best by him,
because, whether he was good, bad, or indifferent, he was the Lord's,
and nothing that was the Lord's was a thing to be neglected. The
Welshman said Huck had good spots in him, and the widow said:

"You can depend on it. That's the Lord's mark. He don't leave it off.
He never does. Puts it somewhere on every creature that comes from his
hands."

Early in the forenoon parties of jaded men began to straggle into the
village, but the strongest of the citizens continued searching. All the
news that could be gained was that remotenesses of the cavern were
being ransacked that had never been visited before; that every corner
and crevice was going to be thoroughly searched; that wherever one
wandered through the maze of passages, lights were to be seen flitting
hither and thither in the distance, and shoutings and pistol-shots sent
their hollow reverberations to the ear down the sombre aisles. In one
place, far from the section usually traversed by tourists, the names
"BECKY & TOM" had been found traced upon the rocky wall with
candle-smoke, and near at hand a grease-soiled bit of ribbon. Mrs.
Thatcher recognized the ribbon and cried over it. She said it was the
last relic she should ever have of her child; and that no other memorial
of her could ever be so precious, because this one parted latest from
the living body before the awful death came. Some said that now and
then, in the cave, a far-away speck of light would glimmer, and then a
glorious shout would burst forth and a score of men go trooping down the
echoing aisle--and then a sickening disappointment always followed; the
children were not there; it was only a searcher's light.

Three dreadful days and nights dragged their tedious hours along, and
the village sank into a hopeless stupor. No one had heart for anything.
The accidental discovery, just made, that the proprietor of the
Temperance Tavern kept liquor on his premises, scarcely fluttered the
public pulse, tremendous as the fact was. In a lucid interval, Huck
feebly led up to the subject of taverns, and finally asked--dimly
dreading the worst--if anything had been discovered at the Temperance
Tavern since he had been ill.

"Yes," said the widow.

Huck started up in bed, wild-eyed:

"What? What was it?"

"Liquor!--and the place has been shut up. Lie down, child--what a turn
you did give me!"

"Only tell me just one thing--only just one--please! Was it Tom Sawyer
that found it?"

The widow burst into tears. "Hush, hush, child, hush! I've told you
before, you must NOT talk. You are very, very sick!"

Then nothing but liquor had been found; there would have been a great
powwow if it had been the gold. So the treasure was gone forever--gone
forever! But what could she be crying about? Curious that she should
cry.

These thoughts worked their dim way through Huck's mind, and under the
weariness they gave him he fell asleep. The widow said to herself:

"There--he's asleep, poor wreck. Tom Sawyer find it! Pity but somebody
could find Tom Sawyer! Ah, there ain't many left, now, that's got hope
enough, or strength enough, either, to go on searching."



CHAPTER XXXI

NOW to return to Tom and Becky's share in the picnic. They tripped
along the murky aisles with the rest of the company, visiting the
familiar wonders of the cave--wonders dubbed with rather
over-descriptive names, such as "The Drawing-Room," "The Cathedral,"
"Aladdin's Palace," and so on. Presently the hide-and-seek frolicking
began, and Tom and Becky engaged in it with zeal until the exertion
began to grow a trifle wearisome; then they wandered down a sinuous
avenue holding their candles aloft and reading the tangled web-work of
names, dates, post-office addresses, and mottoes with which the rocky
walls had been frescoed (in candle-smoke). Still drifting along and
talking, they scarcely noticed that they were now in a part of the cave
whose walls were not frescoed. They smoked their own names under an
overhanging shelf and moved on. Presently they came to a place where a
little stream of water, trickling over a ledge and carrying a limestone
sediment with it, had, in the slow-dragging ages, formed a laced and
ruffled Niagara in gleaming and imperishable stone. Tom squeezed his
small body behind it in order to illuminate it for Becky's
gratification. He found that it curtained a sort of steep natural
stairway which was enclosed between narrow walls, and at once the
ambition to be a discoverer seized him. Becky responded to his call,
and they made a smoke-mark for future guidance, and started upon their
quest. They wound this way and that, far down into the secret depths of
the cave, made another mark, and branched off in search of novelties to
tell the upper world about. In one place they found a spacious cavern,
from whose ceiling depended a multitude of shining stalactites of the
length and circumference of a man's leg; they walked all about it,
wondering and admiring, and presently left it by one of the numerous
passages that opened into it. This shortly brought them to a bewitching
spring, whose basin was incrusted with a frostwork of glittering
crystals; it was in the midst of a cavern whose walls were supported by
many fantastic pillars which had been formed by the joining of great
stalactites and stalagmites together, the result of the ceaseless
water-drip of centuries. Under the roof vast knots of bats had packed
themselves together, thousands in a bunch; the lights disturbed the
creatures and they came flocking down by hundreds, squeaking and
darting furiously at the candles. Tom knew their ways and the danger of
this sort of conduct. He seized Becky's hand and hurried her into the
first corridor that offered; and none too soon, for a bat struck
Becky's light out with its wing while she was passing out of the
cavern. The bats chased the children a good distance; but the fugitives
plunged into every new passage that offered, and at last got rid of the
perilous things. Tom found a subterranean lake, shortly, which
stretched its dim length away until its shape was lost in the shadows.
He wanted to explore its borders, but concluded that it would be best
to sit down and rest awhile, first. Now, for the first time, the deep
stillness of the place laid a clammy hand upon the spirits of the
children. Becky said:

"Why, I didn't notice, but it seems ever so long since I heard any of
the others."

"Come to think, Becky, we are away down below them--and I don't know
how far away north, or south, or east, or whichever it is. We couldn't
hear them here."

Becky grew apprehensive.

"I wonder how long we've been down here, Tom? We better start back."

"Yes, I reckon we better. P'raps we better."

"Can you find the way, Tom? It's all a mixed-up crookedness to me."

"I reckon I could find it--but then the bats. If they put our candles
out it will be an awful fix. Let's try some other way, so as not to go
through there."

"Well. But I hope we won't get lost. It would be so awful!" and the
girl shuddered at the thought of the dreadful possibilities.

They started through a corridor, and traversed it in silence a long
way, glancing at each new opening, to see if there was anything
familiar about the look of it; but they were all strange. Every time
Tom made an examination, Becky would watch his face for an encouraging
sign, and he would say cheerily:

"Oh, it's all right. This ain't the one, but we'll come to it right
away!"

But he felt less and less hopeful with each failure, and presently
began to turn off into diverging avenues at sheer random, in desperate
hope of finding the one that was wanted. He still said it was "all
right," but there was such a leaden dread at his heart that the words
had lost their ring and sounded just as if he had said, "All is lost!"
Becky clung to his side in an anguish of fear, and tried hard to keep
back the tears, but they would come. At last she said:

"Oh, Tom, never mind the bats, let's go back that way! We seem to get
worse and worse off all the time."

"Listen!" said he.

Profound silence; silence so deep that even their breathings were
conspicuous in the hush. Tom shouted. The call went echoing down the
empty aisles and died out in the distance in a faint sound that
resembled a ripple of mocking laughter.

"Oh, don't do it again, Tom, it is too horrid," said Becky.

"It is horrid, but I better, Becky; they might hear us, you know," and
he shouted again.

The "might" was even a chillier horror than the ghostly laughter, it
so confessed a perishing hope. The children stood still and listened;
but there was no result. Tom turned upon the back track at once, and
hurried his steps. It was but a little while before a certain
indecision in his manner revealed another fearful fact to Becky--he
could not find his way back!

"Oh, Tom, you didn't make any marks!"

"Becky, I was such a fool! Such a fool! I never thought we might want
to come back! No--I can't find the way. It's all mixed up."

"Tom, Tom, we're lost! we're lost! We never can get out of this awful
place! Oh, why DID we ever leave the others!"

She sank to the ground and burst into such a frenzy of crying that Tom
was appalled with the idea that she might die, or lose her reason. He
sat down by her and put his arms around her; she buried her face in his
bosom, she clung to him, she poured out her terrors, her unavailing
regrets, and the far echoes turned them all to jeering laughter. Tom
begged her to pluck up hope again, and she said she could not. He fell
to blaming and abusing himself for getting her into this miserable
situation; this had a better effect. She said she would try to hope
again, she would get up and follow wherever he might lead if only he
would not talk like that any more. For he was no more to blame than
she, she said.

So they moved on again--aimlessly--simply at random--all they could do
was to move, keep moving. For a little while, hope made a show of
reviving--not with any reason to back it, but only because it is its
nature to revive when the spring has not been taken out of it by age
and familiarity with failure.

By-and-by Tom took Becky's candle and blew it out. This economy meant
so much! Words were not needed. Becky understood, and her hope died
again. She knew that Tom had a whole candle and three or four pieces in
his pockets--yet he must economize.

By-and-by, fatigue began to assert its claims; the children tried to
pay attention, for it was dreadful to think of sitting down when time
was grown to be so precious, moving, in some direction, in any
direction, was at least progress and might bear fruit; but to sit down
was to invite death and shorten its pursuit.

At last Becky's frail limbs refused to carry her farther. She sat
down. Tom rested with her, and they talked of home, and the friends
there, and the comfortable beds and, above all, the light! Becky cried,
and Tom tried to think of some way of comforting her, but all his
encouragements were grown threadbare with use, and sounded like
sarcasms. Fatigue bore so heavily upon Becky that she drowsed off to
sleep. Tom was grateful. He sat looking into her drawn face and saw it
grow smooth and natural under the influence of pleasant dreams; and
by-and-by a smile dawned and rested there. The peaceful face reflected
somewhat of peace and healing into his own spirit, and his thoughts
wandered away to bygone times and dreamy memories. While he was deep in
his musings, Becky woke up with a breezy little laugh--but it was
stricken dead upon her lips, and a groan followed it.

"Oh, how COULD I sleep! I wish I never, never had waked! No! No, I
don't, Tom! Don't look so! I won't say it again."

"I'm glad you've slept, Becky; you'll feel rested, now, and we'll find
the way out."

"We can try, Tom; but I've seen such a beautiful country in my dream.
I reckon we are going there."

"Maybe not, maybe not. Cheer up, Becky, and let's go on trying."

They rose up and wandered along, hand in hand and hopeless. They tried
to estimate how long they had been in the cave, but all they knew was
that it seemed days and weeks, and yet it was plain that this could not
be, for their candles were not gone yet. A long time after this--they
could not tell how long--Tom said they must go softly and listen for
dripping water--they must find a spring. They found one presently, and
Tom said it was time to rest again. Both were cruelly tired, yet Becky
said she thought she could go a little farther. She was surprised to
hear Tom dissent. She could not understand it. They sat down, and Tom
fastened his candle to the wall in front of them with some clay.
Thought was soon busy; nothing was said for some time. Then Becky broke
the silence:

"Tom, I am so hungry!"

Tom took something out of his pocket.

"Do you remember this?" said he.

Becky almost smiled.

"It's our wedding-cake, Tom."

"Yes--I wish it was as big as a barrel, for it's all we've got."

"I saved it from the picnic for us to dream on, Tom, the way grown-up
people do with wedding-cake--but it'll be our--"

She dropped the sentence where it was. Tom divided the cake and Becky
ate with good appetite, while Tom nibbled at his moiety. There was
abundance of cold water to finish the feast with. By-and-by Becky
suggested that they move on again. Tom was silent a moment. Then he
said:

"Becky, can you bear it if I tell you something?"

Becky's face paled, but she thought she could.

"Well, then, Becky, we must stay here, where there's water to drink.
That little piece is our last candle!"

Becky gave loose to tears and wailings. Tom did what he could to
comfort her, but with little effect. At length Becky said:

"Tom!"

"Well, Becky?"

"They'll miss us and hunt for us!"

"Yes, they will! Certainly they will!"

"Maybe they're hunting for us now, Tom."

"Why, I reckon maybe they are. I hope they are."

"When would they miss us, Tom?"

"When they get back to the boat, I reckon."

"Tom, it might be dark then--would they notice we hadn't come?"

"I don't know. But anyway, your mother would miss you as soon as they
got home."

A frightened look in Becky's face brought Tom to his senses and he saw
that he had made a blunder. Becky was not to have gone home that night!
The children became silent and thoughtful. In a moment a new burst of
grief from Becky showed Tom that the thing in his mind had struck hers
also--that the Sabbath morning might be half spent before Mrs. Thatcher
discovered that Becky was not at Mrs. Harper's.

The children fastened their eyes upon their bit of candle and watched
it melt slowly and pitilessly away; saw the half inch of wick stand
alone at last; saw the feeble flame rise and fall, climb the thin
column of smoke, linger at its top a moment, and then--the horror of
utter darkness reigned!

How long afterward it was that Becky came to a slow consciousness that
she was crying in Tom's arms, neither could tell. All that they knew
was, that after what seemed a mighty stretch of time, both awoke out of
a dead stupor of sleep and resumed their miseries once more. Tom said
it might be Sunday, now--maybe Monday. He tried to get Becky to talk,
but her sorrows were too oppressive, all her hopes were gone. Tom said
that they must have been missed long ago, and no doubt the search was
going on. He would shout and maybe some one would come. He tried it;
but in the darkness the distant echoes sounded so hideously that he
tried it no more.

The hours wasted away, and hunger came to torment the captives again.
A portion of Tom's half of the cake was left; they divided and ate it.
But they seemed hungrier than before. The poor morsel of food only
whetted desire.

By-and-by Tom said:

"SH! Did you hear that?"

Both held their breath and listened. There was a sound like the
faintest, far-off shout. Instantly Tom answered it, and leading Becky
by the hand, started groping down the corridor in its direction.
Presently he listened again; again the sound was heard, and apparently
a little nearer.

"It's them!" said Tom; "they're coming! Come along, Becky--we're all
right now!"

The joy of the prisoners was almost overwhelming. Their speed was
slow, however, because pitfalls were somewhat common, and had to be
guarded against. They shortly came to one and had to stop. It might be
three feet deep, it might be a hundred--there was no passing it at any
rate. Tom got down on his breast and reached as far down as he could.
No bottom. They must stay there and wait until the searchers came. They
listened; evidently the distant shoutings were growing more distant! a
moment or two more and they had gone altogether. The heart-sinking
misery of it! Tom whooped until he was hoarse, but it was of no use. He
talked hopefully to Becky; but an age of anxious waiting passed and no
sounds came again.

The children groped their way back to the spring. The weary time
dragged on; they slept again, and awoke famished and woe-stricken. Tom
believed it must be Tuesday by this time.

Now an idea struck him. There were some side passages near at hand. It
would be better to explore some of these than bear the weight of the
heavy time in idleness. He took a kite-line from his pocket, tied it to
a projection, and he and Becky started, Tom in the lead, unwinding the
line as he groped along. At the end of twenty steps the corridor ended
in a "jumping-off place." Tom got down on his knees and felt below, and
then as far around the corner as he could reach with his hands
conveniently; he made an effort to stretch yet a little farther to the
right, and at that moment, not twenty yards away, a human hand, holding
a candle, appeared from behind a rock! Tom lifted up a glorious shout,
and instantly that hand was followed by the body it belonged to--Injun
Joe's! Tom was paralyzed; he could not move. He was vastly gratified
the next moment, to see the "Spaniard" take to his heels and get
himself out of sight. Tom wondered that Joe had not recognized his
voice and come over and killed him for testifying in court. But the
echoes must have disguised the voice. Without doubt, that was it, he
reasoned. Tom's fright weakened every muscle in his body. He said to
himself that if he had strength enough to get back to the spring he
would stay there, and nothing should tempt him to run the risk of
meeting Injun Joe again. He was careful to keep from Becky what it was
he had seen. He told her he had only shouted "for luck."

But hunger and wretchedness rise superior to fears in the long run.
Another tedious wait at the spring and another long sleep brought
changes. The children awoke tortured with a raging hunger. Tom believed
that it must be Wednesday or Thursday or even Friday or Saturday, now,
and that the search had been given over. He proposed to explore another
passage. He felt willing to risk Injun Joe and all other terrors. But
Becky was very weak. She had sunk into a dreary apathy and would not be
roused. She said she would wait, now, where she was, and die--it would
not be long. She told Tom to go with the kite-line and explore if he
chose; but she implored him to come back every little while and speak
to her; and she made him promise that when the awful time came, he
would stay by her and hold her hand until all was over.

Tom kissed her, with a choking sensation in his throat, and made a
show of being confident of finding the searchers or an escape from the
cave; then he took the kite-line in his hand and went groping down one
of the passages on his hands and knees, distressed with hunger and sick
with bodings of coming doom.



CHAPTER XXXII

TUESDAY afternoon came, and waned to the twilight. The village of St.
Petersburg still mourned. The lost children had not been found. Public
prayers had been offered up for them, and many and many a private
prayer that had the petitioner's whole heart in it; but still no good
news came from the cave. The majority of the searchers had given up the
quest and gone back to their daily avocations, saying that it was plain
the children could never be found. Mrs. Thatcher was very ill, and a
great part of the time delirious. People said it was heartbreaking to
hear her call her child, and raise her head and listen a whole minute
at a time, then lay it wearily down again with a moan. Aunt Polly had
drooped into a settled melancholy, and her gray hair had grown almost
white. The village went to its rest on Tuesday night, sad and forlorn.

Away in the middle of the night a wild peal burst from the village
bells, and in a moment the streets were swarming with frantic half-clad
people, who shouted, "Turn out! turn out! they're found! they're
found!" Tin pans and horns were added to the din, the population massed
itself and moved toward the river, met the children coming in an open
carriage drawn by shouting citizens, thronged around it, joined its
homeward march, and swept magnificently up the main street roaring
huzzah after huzzah!

The village was illuminated; nobody went to bed again; it was the
greatest night the little town had ever seen. During the first half-hour
a procession of villagers filed through Judge Thatcher's house, seized
the saved ones and kissed them, squeezed Mrs. Thatcher's hand, tried to
speak but couldn't--and drifted out raining tears all over the place.

Aunt Polly's happiness was complete, and Mrs. Thatcher's nearly so. It
would be complete, however, as soon as the messenger dispatched with
the great news to the cave should get the word to her husband. Tom lay
upon a sofa with an eager auditory about him and told the history of
the wonderful adventure, putting in many striking additions to adorn it
withal; and closed with a description of how he left Becky and went on
an exploring expedition; how he followed two avenues as far as his
kite-line would reach; how he followed a third to the fullest stretch of
the kite-line, and was about to turn back when he glimpsed a far-off
speck that looked like daylight; dropped the line and groped toward it,
pushed his head and shoulders through a small hole, and saw the broad
Mississippi rolling by! And if it had only happened to be night he would
not have seen that speck of daylight and would not have explored that
passage any more! He told how he went back for Becky and broke the good
news and she told him not to fret her with such stuff, for she was
tired, and knew she was going to die, and wanted to. He described how he
labored with her and convinced her; and how she almost died for joy when
she had groped to where she actually saw the blue speck of daylight; how
he pushed his way out at the hole and then helped her out; how they sat
there and cried for gladness; how some men came along in a skiff and Tom
hailed them and told them their situation and their famished condition;
how the men didn't believe the wild tale at first, "because," said they,
"you are five miles down the river below the valley the cave is in"
--then took them aboard, rowed to a house, gave them supper, made them
rest till two or three hours after dark and then brought them home.

Before day-dawn, Judge Thatcher and the handful of searchers with him
were tracked out, in the cave, by the twine clews they had strung
behind them, and informed of the great news.

Three days and nights of toil and hunger in the cave were not to be
shaken off at once, as Tom and Becky soon discovered. They were
bedridden all of Wednesday and Thursday, and seemed to grow more and
more tired and worn, all the time. Tom got about, a little, on
Thursday, was down-town Friday, and nearly as whole as ever Saturday;
but Becky did not leave her room until Sunday, and then she looked as
if she had passed through a wasting illness.

Tom learned of Huck's sickness and went to see him on Friday, but
could not be admitted to the bedroom; neither could he on Saturday or
Sunday. He was admitted daily after that, but was warned to keep still
about his adventure and introduce no exciting topic. The Widow Douglas
stayed by to see that he obeyed. At home Tom learned of the Cardiff
Hill event; also that the "ragged man's" body had eventually been found
in the river near the ferry-landing; he had been drowned while trying
to escape, perhaps.

About a fortnight after Tom's rescue from the cave, he started off to
visit Huck, who had grown plenty strong enough, now, to hear exciting
talk, and Tom had some that would interest him, he thought. Judge
Thatcher's house was on Tom's way, and he stopped to see Becky. The
Judge and some friends set Tom to talking, and some one asked him
ironically if he wouldn't like to go to the cave again. Tom said he
thought he wouldn't mind it. The Judge said:

"Well, there are others just like you, Tom, I've not the least doubt.
But we have taken care of that. Nobody will get lost in that cave any
more."

"Why?"

"Because I had its big door sheathed with boiler iron two weeks ago,
and triple-locked--and I've got the keys."

Tom turned as white as a sheet.

"What's the matter, boy! Here, run, somebody! Fetch a glass of water!"

The water was brought and thrown into Tom's face.

"Ah, now you're all right. What was the matter with you, Tom?"

"Oh, Judge, Injun Joe's in the cave!"



CHAPTER XXXIII

WITHIN a few minutes the news had spread, and a dozen skiff-loads of
men were on their way to McDougal's cave, and the ferryboat, well
filled with passengers, soon followed. Tom Sawyer was in the skiff that
bore Judge Thatcher.

When the cave door was unlocked, a sorrowful sight presented itself in
the dim twilight of the place. Injun Joe lay stretched upon the ground,
dead, with his face close to the crack of the door, as if his longing
eyes had been fixed, to the latest moment, upon the light and the cheer
of the free world outside. Tom was touched, for he knew by his own
experience how this wretch had suffered. His pity was moved, but
nevertheless he felt an abounding sense of relief and security, now,
which revealed to him in a degree which he had not fully appreciated
before how vast a weight of dread had been lying upon him since the day
he lifted his voice against this bloody-minded outcast.

Injun Joe's bowie-knife lay close by, its blade broken in two. The
great foundation-beam of the door had been chipped and hacked through,
with tedious labor; useless labor, too, it was, for the native rock
formed a sill outside it, and upon that stubborn material the knife had
wrought no effect; the only damage done was to the knife itself. But if
there had been no stony obstruction there the labor would have been
useless still, for if the beam had been wholly cut away Injun Joe could
not have squeezed his body under the door, and he knew it. So he had
only hacked that place in order to be doing something--in order to pass
the weary time--in order to employ his tortured faculties. Ordinarily
one could find half a dozen bits of candle stuck around in the crevices
of this vestibule, left there by tourists; but there were none now. The
prisoner had searched them out and eaten them. He had also contrived to
catch a few bats, and these, also, he had eaten, leaving only their
claws. The poor unfortunate had starved to death. In one place, near at
hand, a stalagmite had been slowly growing up from the ground for ages,
builded by the water-drip from a stalactite overhead. The captive had
broken off the stalagmite, and upon the stump had placed a stone,
wherein he had scooped a shallow hollow to catch the precious drop
that fell once in every three minutes with the dreary regularity of a
clock-tick--a dessertspoonful once in four and twenty hours. That drop
was falling when the Pyramids were new; when Troy fell; when the
foundations of Rome were laid when Christ was crucified; when the
Conqueror created the British empire; when Columbus sailed; when the
massacre at Lexington was "news." It is falling now; it will still be
falling when all these things shall have sunk down the afternoon of
history, and the twilight of tradition, and been swallowed up in the
thick night of oblivion. Has everything a purpose and a mission? Did
this drop fall patiently during five thousand years to be ready for
this flitting human insect's need? and has it another important object
to accomplish ten thousand years to come? No matter. It is many and
many a year since the hapless half-breed scooped out the stone to catch
the priceless drops, but to this day the tourist stares longest at that
pathetic stone and that slow-dropping water when he comes to see the
wonders of McDougal's cave. Injun Joe's cup stands first in the list of
the cavern's marvels; even "Aladdin's Palace" cannot rival it.

Injun Joe was buried near the mouth of the cave; and people flocked
there in boats and wagons from the towns and from all the farms and
hamlets for seven miles around; they brought their children, and all
sorts of provisions, and confessed that they had had almost as
satisfactory a time at the funeral as they could have had at the
hanging.

This funeral stopped the further growth of one thing--the petition to
the governor for Injun Joe's pardon. The petition had been largely
signed; many tearful and eloquent meetings had been held, and a
committee of sappy women been appointed to go in deep mourning and wail
around the governor, and implore him to be a merciful ass and trample
his duty under foot. Injun Joe was believed to have killed five
citizens of the village, but what of that? If he had been Satan himself
there would have been plenty of weaklings ready to scribble their names
to a pardon-petition, and drip a tear on it from their permanently
impaired and leaky water-works.

The morning after the funeral Tom took Huck to a private place to have
an important talk. Huck had learned all about Tom's adventure from the
Welshman and the Widow Douglas, by this time, but Tom said he reckoned
there was one thing they had not told him; that thing was what he
wanted to talk about now. Huck's face saddened. He said:

"I know what it is. You got into No. 2 and never found anything but
whiskey. Nobody told me it was you; but I just knowed it must 'a' ben
you, soon as I heard 'bout that whiskey business; and I knowed you
hadn't got the money becuz you'd 'a' got at me some way or other and
told me even if you was mum to everybody else. Tom, something's always
told me we'd never get holt of that swag."

"Why, Huck, I never told on that tavern-keeper. YOU know his tavern
was all right the Saturday I went to the picnic. Don't you remember you
was to watch there that night?"

"Oh yes! Why, it seems 'bout a year ago. It was that very night that I
follered Injun Joe to the widder's."

"YOU followed him?"

"Yes--but you keep mum. I reckon Injun Joe's left friends behind him,
and I don't want 'em souring on me and doing me mean tricks. If it
hadn't ben for me he'd be down in Texas now, all right."

Then Huck told his entire adventure in confidence to Tom, who had only
heard of the Welshman's part of it before.

"Well," said Huck, presently, coming back to the main question,
"whoever nipped the whiskey in No. 2, nipped the money, too, I reckon
--anyways it's a goner for us, Tom."

"Huck, that money wasn't ever in No. 2!"

"What!" Huck searched his comrade's face keenly. "Tom, have you got on
the track of that money again?"

"Huck, it's in the cave!"

Huck's eyes blazed.

"Say it again, Tom."

"The money's in the cave!"

"Tom--honest injun, now--is it fun, or earnest?"

"Earnest, Huck--just as earnest as ever I was in my life. Will you go
in there with me and help get it out?"

"I bet I will! I will if it's where we can blaze our way to it and not
get lost."

"Huck, we can do that without the least little bit of trouble in the
world."

"Good as wheat! What makes you think the money's--"

"Huck, you just wait till we get in there. If we don't find it I'll
agree to give you my drum and every thing I've got in the world. I
will, by jings."

"All right--it's a whiz. When do you say?"

"Right now, if you say it. Are you strong enough?"

"Is it far in the cave? I ben on my pins a little, three or four days,
now, but I can't walk more'n a mile, Tom--least I don't think I could."

"It's about five mile into there the way anybody but me would go,
Huck, but there's a mighty short cut that they don't anybody but me
know about. Huck, I'll take you right to it in a skiff. I'll float the
skiff down there, and I'll pull it back again all by myself. You
needn't ever turn your hand over."

"Less start right off, Tom."

"All right. We want some bread and meat, and our pipes, and a little
bag or two, and two or three kite-strings, and some of these
new-fangled things they call lucifer matches. I tell you, many's
the time I wished I had some when I was in there before."

A trifle after noon the boys borrowed a small skiff from a citizen who
was absent, and got under way at once. When they were several miles
below "Cave Hollow," Tom said:

"Now you see this bluff here looks all alike all the way down from the
cave hollow--no houses, no wood-yards, bushes all alike. But do you see
that white place up yonder where there's been a landslide? Well, that's
one of my marks. We'll get ashore, now."

They landed.

"Now, Huck, where we're a-standing you could touch that hole I got out
of with a fishing-pole. See if you can find it."

Huck searched all the place about, and found nothing. Tom proudly
marched into a thick clump of sumach bushes and said:

"Here you are! Look at it, Huck; it's the snuggest hole in this
country. You just keep mum about it. All along I've been wanting to be
a robber, but I knew I'd got to have a thing like this, and where to
run across it was the bother. We've got it now, and we'll keep it
quiet, only we'll let Joe Harper and Ben Rogers in--because of course
there's got to be a Gang, or else there wouldn't be any style about it.
Tom Sawyer's Gang--it sounds splendid, don't it, Huck?"

"Well, it just does, Tom. And who'll we rob?"

"Oh, most anybody. Waylay people--that's mostly the way."

"And kill them?"

"No, not always. Hive them in the cave till they raise a ransom."

"What's a ransom?"

"Money. You make them raise all they can, off'n their friends; and
after you've kept them a year, if it ain't raised then you kill them.
That's the general way. Only you don't kill the women. You shut up the
women, but you don't kill them. They're always beautiful and rich, and
awfully scared. You take their watches and things, but you always take
your hat off and talk polite. They ain't anybody as polite as robbers
--you'll see that in any book. Well, the women get to loving you, and
after they've been in the cave a week or two weeks they stop crying and
after that you couldn't get them to leave. If you drove them out they'd
turn right around and come back. It's so in all the books."

"Why, it's real bully, Tom. I believe it's better'n to be a pirate."

"Yes, it's better in some ways, because it's close to home and
circuses and all that."

By this time everything was ready and the boys entered the hole, Tom
in the lead. They toiled their way to the farther end of the tunnel,
then made their spliced kite-strings fast and moved on. A few steps
brought them to the spring, and Tom felt a shudder quiver all through
him. He showed Huck the fragment of candle-wick perched on a lump of
clay against the wall, and described how he and Becky had watched the
flame struggle and expire.

The boys began to quiet down to whispers, now, for the stillness and
gloom of the place oppressed their spirits. They went on, and presently
entered and followed Tom's other corridor until they reached the
"jumping-off place." The candles revealed the fact that it was not
really a precipice, but only a steep clay hill twenty or thirty feet
high. Tom whispered:

"Now I'll show you something, Huck."

He held his candle aloft and said:

"Look as far around the corner as you can. Do you see that? There--on
the big rock over yonder--done with candle-smoke."

"Tom, it's a CROSS!"

"NOW where's your Number Two? 'UNDER THE CROSS,' hey? Right yonder's
where I saw Injun Joe poke up his candle, Huck!"

Huck stared at the mystic sign awhile, and then said with a shaky voice:

"Tom, less git out of here!"

"What! and leave the treasure?"

"Yes--leave it. Injun Joe's ghost is round about there, certain."

"No it ain't, Huck, no it ain't. It would ha'nt the place where he
died--away out at the mouth of the cave--five mile from here."

"No, Tom, it wouldn't. It would hang round the money. I know the ways
of ghosts, and so do you."

Tom began to fear that Huck was right. Misgivings gathered in his
mind. But presently an idea occurred to him--

"Lookyhere, Huck, what fools we're making of ourselves! Injun Joe's
ghost ain't a going to come around where there's a cross!"

The point was well taken. It had its effect.

"Tom, I didn't think of that. But that's so. It's luck for us, that
cross is. I reckon we'll climb down there and have a hunt for that box."

Tom went first, cutting rude steps in the clay hill as he descended.
Huck followed. Four avenues opened out of the small cavern which the
great rock stood in. The boys examined three of them with no result.
They found a small recess in the one nearest the base of the rock, with
a pallet of blankets spread down in it; also an old suspender, some
bacon rind, and the well-gnawed bones of two or three fowls. But there
was no money-box. The lads searched and researched this place, but in
vain. Tom said:

"He said UNDER the cross. Well, this comes nearest to being under the
cross. It can't be under the rock itself, because that sets solid on
the ground."

They searched everywhere once more, and then sat down discouraged.
Huck could suggest nothing. By-and-by Tom said:

"Lookyhere, Huck, there's footprints and some candle-grease on the
clay about one side of this rock, but not on the other sides. Now,
what's that for? I bet you the money IS under the rock. I'm going to
dig in the clay."

"That ain't no bad notion, Tom!" said Huck with animation.

Tom's "real Barlow" was out at once, and he had not dug four inches
before he struck wood.

"Hey, Huck!--you hear that?"

Huck began to dig and scratch now. Some boards were soon uncovered and
removed. They had concealed a natural chasm which led under the rock.
Tom got into this and held his candle as far under the rock as he
could, but said he could not see to the end of the rift. He proposed to
explore. He stooped and passed under; the narrow way descended
gradually. He followed its winding course, first to the right, then to
the left, Huck at his heels. Tom turned a short curve, by-and-by, and
exclaimed:

"My goodness, Huck, lookyhere!"

It was the treasure-box, sure enough, occupying a snug little cavern,
along with an empty powder-keg, a couple of guns in leather cases, two
or three pairs of old moccasins, a leather belt, and some other rubbish
well soaked with the water-drip.

"Got it at last!" said Huck, ploughing among the tarnished coins with
his hand. "My, but we're rich, Tom!"

"Huck, I always reckoned we'd get it. It's just too good to believe,
but we HAVE got it, sure! Say--let's not fool around here. Let's snake
it out. Lemme see if I can lift the box."

It weighed about fifty pounds. Tom could lift it, after an awkward
fashion, but could not carry it conveniently.

"I thought so," he said; "THEY carried it like it was heavy, that day
at the ha'nted house. I noticed that. I reckon I was right to think of
fetching the little bags along."

The money was soon in the bags and the boys took it up to the cross
rock.

"Now less fetch the guns and things," said Huck.

"No, Huck--leave them there. They're just the tricks to have when we
go to robbing. We'll keep them there all the time, and we'll hold our
orgies there, too. It's an awful snug place for orgies."

"What orgies?"

"I dono. But robbers always have orgies, and of course we've got to
have them, too. Come along, Huck, we've been in here a long time. It's
getting late, I reckon. I'm hungry, too. We'll eat and smoke when we
get to the skiff."

They presently emerged into the clump of sumach bushes, looked warily
out, found the coast clear, and were soon lunching and smoking in the
skiff. As the sun dipped toward the horizon they pushed out and got
under way. Tom skimmed up the shore through the long twilight, chatting
cheerily with Huck, and landed shortly after dark.

"Now, Huck," said Tom, "we'll hide the money in the loft of the
widow's woodshed, and I'll come up in the morning and we'll count it
and divide, and then we'll hunt up a place out in the woods for it
where it will be safe. Just you lay quiet here and watch the stuff till
I run and hook Benny Taylor's little wagon; I won't be gone a minute."

He disappeared, and presently returned with the wagon, put the two
small sacks into it, threw some old rags on top of them, and started
off, dragging his cargo behind him. When the boys reached the
Welshman's house, they stopped to rest. Just as they were about to move
on, the Welshman stepped out and said:

"Hallo, who's that?"

"Huck and Tom Sawyer."

"Good! Come along with me, boys, you are keeping everybody waiting.
Here--hurry up, trot ahead--I'll haul the wagon for you. Why, it's not
as light as it might be. Got bricks in it?--or old metal?"

"Old metal," said Tom.

"I judged so; the boys in this town will take more trouble and fool
away more time hunting up six bits' worth of old iron to sell to the
foundry than they would to make twice the money at regular work. But
that's human nature--hurry along, hurry along!"

The boys wanted to know what the hurry was about.

"Never mind; you'll see, when we get to the Widow Douglas'."

Huck said with some apprehension--for he was long used to being
falsely accused:

"Mr. Jones, we haven't been doing nothing."

The Welshman laughed.

"Well, I don't know, Huck, my boy. I don't know about that. Ain't you
and the widow good friends?"

"Yes. Well, she's ben good friends to me, anyway."

"All right, then. What do you want to be afraid for?"

This question was not entirely answered in Huck's slow mind before he
found himself pushed, along with Tom, into Mrs. Douglas' drawing-room.
Mr. Jones left the wagon near the door and followed.

The place was grandly lighted, and everybody that was of any
consequence in the village was there. The Thatchers were there, the
Harpers, the Rogerses, Aunt Polly, Sid, Mary, the minister, the editor,
and a great many more, and all dressed in their best. The widow
received the boys as heartily as any one could well receive two such
looking beings. They were covered with clay and candle-grease. Aunt
Polly blushed crimson with humiliation, and frowned and shook her head
at Tom. Nobody suffered half as much as the two boys did, however. Mr.
Jones said:

"Tom wasn't at home, yet, so I gave him up; but I stumbled on him and
Huck right at my door, and so I just brought them along in a hurry."

"And you did just right," said the widow. "Come with me, boys."

She took them to a bedchamber and said:

"Now wash and dress yourselves. Here are two new suits of clothes
--shirts, socks, everything complete. They're Huck's--no, no thanks,
Huck--Mr. Jones bought one and I the other. But they'll fit both of you.
Get into them. We'll wait--come down when you are slicked up enough."

Then she left.



CHAPTER XXXIV

HUCK said: "Tom, we can slope, if we can find a rope. The window ain't
high from the ground."

"Shucks! what do you want to slope for?"

"Well, I ain't used to that kind of a crowd. I can't stand it. I ain't
going down there, Tom."

"Oh, bother! It ain't anything. I don't mind it a bit. I'll take care
of you."

Sid appeared.

"Tom," said he, "auntie has been waiting for you all the afternoon.
Mary got your Sunday clothes ready, and everybody's been fretting about
you. Say--ain't this grease and clay, on your clothes?"

"Now, Mr. Siddy, you jist 'tend to your own business. What's all this
blow-out about, anyway?"

"It's one of the widow's parties that she's always having. This time
it's for the Welshman and his sons, on account of that scrape they
helped her out of the other night. And say--I can tell you something,
if you want to know."

"Well, what?"

"Why, old Mr. Jones is going to try to spring something on the people
here to-night, but I overheard him tell auntie to-day about it, as a
secret, but I reckon it's not much of a secret now. Everybody knows
--the widow, too, for all she tries to let on she don't. Mr. Jones was
bound Huck should be here--couldn't get along with his grand secret
without Huck, you know!"

"Secret about what, Sid?"

"About Huck tracking the robbers to the widow's. I reckon Mr. Jones
was going to make a grand time over his surprise, but I bet you it will
drop pretty flat."

Sid chuckled in a very contented and satisfied way.

"Sid, was it you that told?"

"Oh, never mind who it was. SOMEBODY told--that's enough."

"Sid, there's only one person in this town mean enough to do that, and
that's you. If you had been in Huck's place you'd 'a' sneaked down the
hill and never told anybody on the robbers. You can't do any but mean
things, and you can't bear to see anybody praised for doing good ones.
There--no thanks, as the widow says"--and Tom cuffed Sid's ears and
helped him to the door with several kicks. "Now go and tell auntie if
you dare--and to-morrow you'll catch it!"

Some minutes later the widow's guests were at the supper-table, and a
dozen children were propped up at little side-tables in the same room,
after the fashion of that country and that day. At the proper time Mr.
Jones made his little speech, in which he thanked the widow for the
honor she was doing himself and his sons, but said that there was
another person whose modesty--

And so forth and so on. He sprung his secret about Huck's share in the
adventure in the finest dramatic manner he was master of, but the
surprise it occasioned was largely counterfeit and not as clamorous and
effusive as it might have been under happier circumstances. However,
the widow made a pretty fair show of astonishment, and heaped so many
compliments and so much gratitude upon Huck that he almost forgot the
nearly intolerable discomfort of his new clothes in the entirely
intolerable discomfort of being set up as a target for everybody's gaze
and everybody's laudations.

The widow said she meant to give Huck a home under her roof and have
him educated; and that when she could spare the money she would start
him in business in a modest way. Tom's chance was come. He said:

"Huck don't need it. Huck's rich."

Nothing but a heavy strain upon the good manners of the company kept
back the due and proper complimentary laugh at this pleasant joke. But
the silence was a little awkward. Tom broke it:

"Huck's got money. Maybe you don't believe it, but he's got lots of
it. Oh, you needn't smile--I reckon I can show you. You just wait a
minute."

Tom ran out of doors. The company looked at each other with a
perplexed interest--and inquiringly at Huck, who was tongue-tied.

"Sid, what ails Tom?" said Aunt Polly. "He--well, there ain't ever any
making of that boy out. I never--"

Tom entered, struggling with the weight of his sacks, and Aunt Polly
did not finish her sentence. Tom poured the mass of yellow coin upon
the table and said:

"There--what did I tell you? Half of it's Huck's and half of it's mine!"

The spectacle took the general breath away. All gazed, nobody spoke
for a moment. Then there was a unanimous call for an explanation. Tom
said he could furnish it, and he did. The tale was long, but brimful of
interest. There was scarcely an interruption from any one to break the
charm of its flow. When he had finished, Mr. Jones said:

"I thought I had fixed up a little surprise for this occasion, but it
don't amount to anything now. This one makes it sing mighty small, I'm
willing to allow."

The money was counted. The sum amounted to a little over twelve
thousand dollars. It was more than any one present had ever seen at one
time before, though several persons were there who were worth
considerably more than that in property.



CHAPTER XXXV

THE reader may rest satisfied that Tom's and Huck's windfall made a
mighty stir in the poor little village of St. Petersburg. So vast a
sum, all in actual cash, seemed next to incredible. It was talked
about, gloated over, glorified, until the reason of many of the
citizens tottered under the strain of the unhealthy excitement. Every
"haunted" house in St. Petersburg and the neighboring villages was
dissected, plank by plank, and its foundations dug up and ransacked for
hidden treasure--and not by boys, but men--pretty grave, unromantic
men, too, some of them. Wherever Tom and Huck appeared they were
courted, admired, stared at. The boys were not able to remember that
their remarks had possessed weight before; but now their sayings were
treasured and repeated; everything they did seemed somehow to be
regarded as remarkable; they had evidently lost the power of doing and
saying commonplace things; moreover, their past history was raked up
and discovered to bear marks of conspicuous originality. The village
paper published biographical sketches of the boys.

The Widow Douglas put Huck's money out at six per cent., and Judge
Thatcher did the same with Tom's at Aunt Polly's request. Each lad had
an income, now, that was simply prodigious--a dollar for every week-day
in the year and half of the Sundays. It was just what the minister got
--no, it was what he was promised--he generally couldn't collect it. A
dollar and a quarter a week would board, lodge, and school a boy in
those old simple days--and clothe him and wash him, too, for that
matter.

Judge Thatcher had conceived a great opinion of Tom. He said that no
commonplace boy would ever have got his daughter out of the cave. When
Becky told her father, in strict confidence, how Tom had taken her
whipping at school, the Judge was visibly moved; and when she pleaded
grace for the mighty lie which Tom had told in order to shift that
whipping from her shoulders to his own, the Judge said with a fine
outburst that it was a noble, a generous, a magnanimous lie--a lie that
was worthy to hold up its head and march down through history breast to
breast with George Washington's lauded Truth about the hatchet! Becky
thought her father had never looked so tall and so superb as when he
walked the floor and stamped his foot and said that. She went straight
off and told Tom about it.

Judge Thatcher hoped to see Tom a great lawyer or a great soldier some
day. He said he meant to look to it that Tom should be admitted to the
National Military Academy and afterward trained in the best law school
in the country, in order that he might be ready for either career or
both.

Huck Finn's wealth and the fact that he was now under the Widow
Douglas' protection introduced him into society--no, dragged him into
it, hurled him into it--and his sufferings were almost more than he
could bear. The widow's servants kept him clean and neat, combed and
brushed, and they bedded him nightly in unsympathetic sheets that had
not one little spot or stain which he could press to his heart and know
for a friend. He had to eat with a knife and fork; he had to use
napkin, cup, and plate; he had to learn his book, he had to go to
church; he had to talk so properly that speech was become insipid in
his mouth; whithersoever he turned, the bars and shackles of
civilization shut him in and bound him hand and foot.

He bravely bore his miseries three weeks, and then one day turned up
missing. For forty-eight hours the widow hunted for him everywhere in
great distress. The public were profoundly concerned; they searched
high and low, they dragged the river for his body. Early the third
morning Tom Sawyer wisely went poking among some old empty hogsheads
down behind the abandoned slaughter-house, and in one of them he found
the refugee. Huck had slept there; he had just breakfasted upon some
stolen odds and ends of food, and was lying off, now, in comfort, with
his pipe. He was unkempt, uncombed, and clad in the same old ruin of
rags that had made him picturesque in the days when he was free and
happy. Tom routed him out, told him the trouble he had been causing,
and urged him to go home. Huck's face lost its tranquil content, and
took a melancholy cast. He said:

"Don't talk about it, Tom. I've tried it, and it don't work; it don't
work, Tom. It ain't for me; I ain't used to it. The widder's good to
me, and friendly; but I can't stand them ways. She makes me get up just
at the same time every morning; she makes me wash, they comb me all to
thunder; she won't let me sleep in the woodshed; I got to wear them
blamed clothes that just smothers me, Tom; they don't seem to any air
git through 'em, somehow; and they're so rotten nice that I can't set
down, nor lay down, nor roll around anywher's; I hain't slid on a
cellar-door for--well, it 'pears to be years; I got to go to church and
sweat and sweat--I hate them ornery sermons! I can't ketch a fly in
there, I can't chaw. I got to wear shoes all Sunday. The widder eats by
a bell; she goes to bed by a bell; she gits up by a bell--everything's
so awful reg'lar a body can't stand it."

"Well, everybody does that way, Huck."

"Tom, it don't make no difference. I ain't everybody, and I can't
STAND it. It's awful to be tied up so. And grub comes too easy--I don't
take no interest in vittles, that way. I got to ask to go a-fishing; I
got to ask to go in a-swimming--dern'd if I hain't got to ask to do
everything. Well, I'd got to talk so nice it wasn't no comfort--I'd got
to go up in the attic and rip out awhile, every day, to git a taste in
my mouth, or I'd a died, Tom. The widder wouldn't let me smoke; she
wouldn't let me yell, she wouldn't let me gape, nor stretch, nor
scratch, before folks--" [Then with a spasm of special irritation and
injury]--"And dad fetch it, she prayed all the time! I never see such a
woman! I HAD to shove, Tom--I just had to. And besides, that school's
going to open, and I'd a had to go to it--well, I wouldn't stand THAT,
Tom. Looky here, Tom, being rich ain't what it's cracked up to be. It's
just worry and worry, and sweat and sweat, and a-wishing you was dead
all the time. Now these clothes suits me, and this bar'l suits me, and
I ain't ever going to shake 'em any more. Tom, I wouldn't ever got into
all this trouble if it hadn't 'a' ben for that money; now you just take
my sheer of it along with your'n, and gimme a ten-center sometimes--not
many times, becuz I don't give a dern for a thing 'thout it's tollable
hard to git--and you go and beg off for me with the widder."

"Oh, Huck, you know I can't do that. 'Tain't fair; and besides if
you'll try this thing just a while longer you'll come to like it."

"Like it! Yes--the way I'd like a hot stove if I was to set on it long
enough. No, Tom, I won't be rich, and I won't live in them cussed
smothery houses. I like the woods, and the river, and hogsheads, and
I'll stick to 'em, too. Blame it all! just as we'd got guns, and a
cave, and all just fixed to rob, here this dern foolishness has got to
come up and spile it all!"

Tom saw his opportunity--

"Lookyhere, Huck, being rich ain't going to keep me back from turning
robber."

"No! Oh, good-licks; are you in real dead-wood earnest, Tom?"

"Just as dead earnest as I'm sitting here. But Huck, we can't let you
into the gang if you ain't respectable, you know."

Huck's joy was quenched.

"Can't let me in, Tom? Didn't you let me go for a pirate?"

"Yes, but that's different. A robber is more high-toned than what a
pirate is--as a general thing. In most countries they're awful high up
in the nobility--dukes and such."

"Now, Tom, hain't you always ben friendly to me? You wouldn't shet me
out, would you, Tom? You wouldn't do that, now, WOULD you, Tom?"

"Huck, I wouldn't want to, and I DON'T want to--but what would people
say? Why, they'd say, 'Mph! Tom Sawyer's Gang! pretty low characters in
it!' They'd mean you, Huck. You wouldn't like that, and I wouldn't."

Huck was silent for some time, engaged in a mental struggle. Finally
he said:

"Well, I'll go back to the widder for a month and tackle it and see if
I can come to stand it, if you'll let me b'long to the gang, Tom."

"All right, Huck, it's a whiz! Come along, old chap, and I'll ask the
widow to let up on you a little, Huck."

"Will you, Tom--now will you? That's good. If she'll let up on some of
the roughest things, I'll smoke private and cuss private, and crowd
through or bust. When you going to start the gang and turn robbers?"

"Oh, right off. We'll get the boys together and have the initiation
to-night, maybe."

"Have the which?"

"Have the initiation."

"What's that?"

"It's to swear to stand by one another, and never tell the gang's
secrets, even if you're chopped all to flinders, and kill anybody and
all his family that hurts one of the gang."

"That's gay--that's mighty gay, Tom, I tell you."

"Well, I bet it is. And all that swearing's got to be done at
midnight, in the lonesomest, awfulest place you can find--a ha'nted
house is the best, but they're all ripped up now."

"Well, midnight's good, anyway, Tom."

"Yes, so it is. And you've got to swear on a coffin, and sign it with
blood."

"Now, that's something LIKE! Why, it's a million times bullier than
pirating. I'll stick to the widder till I rot, Tom; and if I git to be
a reg'lar ripper of a robber, and everybody talking 'bout it, I reckon
she'll be proud she snaked me in out of the wet."



CONCLUSION

SO endeth this chronicle. It being strictly a history of a BOY, it
must stop here; the story could not go much further without becoming
the history of a MAN. When one writes a novel about grown people, he
knows exactly where to stop--that is, with a marriage; but when he
writes of juveniles, he must stop where he best can.

Most of the characters that perform in this book still live, and are
prosperous and happy. Some day it may seem worth while to take up the
story of the younger ones again and see what sort of men and women they
turned out to be; therefore it will be wisest not to reveal any of that
part of their lives at present.